Total pages: 350

=== PAGE 1 ===

=== PAGE 2 ===
Clinical
Supervision
A COMPETENCY-BASED APPROACH
Carol A. Falender and Edward P. Shafranske
American Psychological Association
Washington, DC

=== PAGE 3 ===
Copyright © 2004 by the American Psychological Association. All rights reserved.
Except as permitted under the United States Copyright Act of 1976, no part of this
publication may be reproduced or distributed in any form or by any means, or stored in
a database or retrieval system, without the prior written permission of the publisher.
Published by
American Psychological Association
750 First Street, NE
Washington, DC 20002
www.apa.org
To order 
In the U.K., Europe, Africa, and the Middle
APA Order Department 
East, copies may be ordered from
P.O. Box 92984 
American Psychological Association
Washington, DC 20090-2984 
3 Henrietta Street
Tel: (800) 374-2721 
Covent Garden, London
Direct: (202) 336-5510 
WC2E 8LU England
Fax: (202) 336-5502
TDD/TTY: (202) 336-6123
Online: www.apa.org/books/
E-mail: order@apa.org
Typeset in Goudy by World Composition Services, Inc., Sterling, VA
Printer: Edwards Brothers, Inc., Ann Arbor, MI
Cover Designer: Naylor Design, Washington, DC
Technical/Production Editor: Dan Brachtesende
The opinions and statements published are the responsibility of the authors, and such
opinions and statements do not necessarily represent the policies of the American
Psychological Association.
Library of Congress Cataloging-in-Publication Data
Falender, Carol A.
Clinical supervision : a competency-based approach / Carol A. Falender and Edward
P. Shafranske.—1st ed.
p. cm.
Includes bibliographical references and index.
ISBN 1-59147-119-2
1. Clinical psychologists—Supervision of. I. Shafranske, Edward P. II. Title.
RC467.7.F354 2004
362.2'0425'0683—dc22 
2003023166
British Library Cataloguing-in-Publication Data
A CIP record is available from the British Library.
Printed in the United States of America
First Edition

=== PAGE 4 ===
To our spouses and children, Martin Zohn and sons, David and Daniel,
and Kathy Shafranske and daughters, Kristen and Karen,
for their endless support and patience, and to the supervisors, students,
trainees, and interns who have challenged and inspired us.

=== PAGE 5 ===
CONTENTS
Acknowledgments 
ix
Chapter 1. 
The Practice of Clinical Supervision 
3
Chapter 2. 
What Makes for Good Supervision? 
37
Chapter 3. 
Building Technical Competence 
59
Chapter 4. 
Addressing Personal Factors in Supervision 
81
Chapter 5. 
Alliance in Therapeutic and
Supervisory Relationships 
95
Chapter 6. 
Building Diversity Competence in Supervision 
115
Chapter 7. 
Ethical and Legal Perspectives and
Risk Management 
151
Chapter 8. 
Evaluation of the Supervisory Process 
195
Chapter 9. 
The Evolving Practice of Clinical Supervision 
227
Appendix A. 
Sample Supervision Contract Outline 
233
Appendix B. 
Working Alliance Inventory 
237
Appendix C. 
Cross-Cultural Counseling Inventory—Revised 
243
Appendix D. 
Multicultural Counseling Knowledge and
Awareness Scale 
245
Appendix E. 
Multicultural Competency Checklist for
Counseling Psychology 
249

=== PAGE 6 ===
Appendix F. 
Trainee-Client Sexual Misconduct 
253
Appendix G. 
Competencies of Supervisors 
257
Appendix H. 
Role Conflict and Role Ambiguity Inventory 
265
Appendix I. 
Evaluation Process Within
Supervision Inventory 
269
Appendix]. 
Supervision Outcomes Survey 
271
Appendix K. 
Supervisor Feedback 
273
Appendix L. 
Therapist Evaluation Checklist 
277
References 
281
Index 
335
About the Authors 
347
vm
CONTENTS

=== PAGE 7 ===
ACKNOWLEDGMENTS
We want to acknowledge and express our appreciation to the many
professionals in the American Psychological Association (APA) Books De-
partment who contributed to the development and production of this text.
First, we want to thank Lansing Hays, our acquisitions editor, who provided
encouragement throughout the early development of the manuscript. With
his support, we were able to include many tools, which supervisors may use
in the evaluation of the competencies discussed in the book. Development
editors have the challenging task of collaborating with authors in refining
and improving a manuscript. We are grateful to Ed Meidenbauer for his
thoughtful review of the original manuscript and clearly stated recommenda-
tions, which brought improvement and never compromised the integrity of
our work. We wish to also express our appreciation to the external and
internal reviewers who provided useful feedback, which was incorporated
into the text. We are grateful as well to Daniel Brachtesende, our production
editor, who closely refined our prose and worked collaboratively with us in
preparing the manuscript for publication. We also want to acknowledge the
contributions of Anne Woodworth, who considered our recommendations
regarding the design of the cover and to the other staff at APA Books who
supported the publication of the book. We want to also acknowledge Gary
VandenBos and Julia Frank-McNeil for their dedication and leadership.
They have assembled a publishing team that supports the APA's mission
by publishing thought-provoking books relevant in the professional practice
of psychology. We also want to express our appreciation to the authors and
publishers of the tools, exhibits, and figures contained in this book, which
were published with their permission. Although too numerous to name
personally, we want to acknowledge our colleagues, professors, supervisors,
and supervisees who have influenced our development and in so many ways
have contributed to the ideas put forth in this book.

=== PAGE 8 ===
1
THE PRACTICE OF
CLINICAL SUPERVISION
Supervised practice is the cornerstone in the education and training
of a psychologist (ASPPB Task Force on Supervision Guidelines, 1998;
Russell & Petrie, 1994, p. 27). It provides the experiential foundation for
the psychologist's knowledge, skills, and values to be consolidated and
applied. As an integral facet of such experience, clinical supervision serves
two essential and interrelated functions: to ensure the integrity of clinical
services provided to the client and to develop competence in the supervisee.
We define supervision as follows:
Supervision is a distinct professional activity in which education and
training aimed at developing science-informed practice are facilitated
through a collaborative interpersonal process. It involves observation,
evaluation, feedback, the facilitation of supervisee self-assessment, and
the acquisition of knowledge and skills by instruction, modeling, and
mutual problem solving. In addition, by building on the recognition of
the strengths and talents of the supervisee, supervision encourages self-
efficacy. Supervision ensures that clinical consultation is conducted in
a competent manner in which ethical standards, legal prescriptions,
and professional practices are used to promote and protect the welfare
of the client, the profession, and society at large.
In our view, effective supervision builds on three interrelated pillars:
the supervisory relationship, inquiry, and educational praxis. Each pillar

=== PAGE 9 ===
relies on and contributes to the others through a synergistic confluence,
either enhancing or compromising the supervisory process. The supervisory
relationship provides the foundation for the development of an alliance
in which the individual and shared responsibilities in the supervision of
clinical practice will be fulfilled. We suggest that the supervisory alliance
is, to a great extent, the result of the nature and quality of the relationship
that is formed between the supervisor and supervisee. Inquiry refers to
all the processes that facilitate critical understanding of the therapeutic
process as well as foster in the supervisee greater awareness of his or
her professional and personal contributions to it. Educational praxis
provides multiple learning strategies, including instruction, observation,
and role playing, tailored to enhance the supervisee's knowledge and to
develop his or her technical skills. These pillars represent the assemblage
of a number of professional competencies as well interpersonal skills,
personal strengths, and values.
Each pillar requires skillful attention to establish a supervisory pro-
cess in which the highest quality care and welfare of clients are assured
and clinical training objectives are met. These responsibilities are extremely
important and can be fulfilled only with a foundation of competent
supervisory practice. As a distinct professional activity, supervision in-
corporates many personal and professional competencies that require fur-
ther articulation, understanding, and development through professional
training.
This book presents a competency-based approach to supervision that
emphasizes the use of science-informed theory and practice. Without mini-
mizing the complexity of supervision or ignoring the present scientific stand-
ing of the field, we posit that the practice of supervision involves identifiable
competencies, which can be learned and in turn promote the supervisee's
clinical competence through the integration and application of specific
knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values. Furthermore, we present four super-
ordinate values that we believe to be integral to supervision and clinical
practice: integrity-in-relationship, ethical values-based practice, apprecia-
tion of diversity, and science-informed practice. Finally, we advocate for an
approach to supervision that recognizes the personal strengths supervisees
bring to their education and clinical training and, drawing on principles
derived from positive psychology, informs the learning process and leads to
increased competence and self-efficacy.
In this chapter, we discuss competence and the intended outcomes of
supervision. We then review the approaches to the practice of supervision
and present an overview of the competency-based approach, including the
four superordinate values that inform the process. We conclude with a
discussion of the structure of the book.
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

=== PAGE 10 ===
COMPETENCE
On the basis of Epstein and Hundert (2002), we define competence
to be "the habitual and judicious use of communication, knowledge, techni-
cal skills, clinical reasoning, emotions, values, and reflection in daily practice
for the benefit of the individual and the community being served" (p. 226).
Further, we consider competence to be the state of sufficiency relative to
the specific performance or training requirements within the given setting
in which such abilities are exercised. Competence therefore is not an abso-
lute, nor does it involve a narrow set of professional behaviors; rather,
competence reflects sufficiency of a broad spectrum of personal and professional
abilities relative to a given requirement. Roe (2002) distinguished between
input-model approaches to professional competency, which define the educa-
tional curricula necessary for one to become a psychologist, and the output-
model approaches, or approaches that emphasize the particular roles and
functions a psychologist should be able to perform. Although Kitchener
(2000) concluded that "it may be easier to require psychologists [and trainees]
to be competent than it is to define what competence means [and] compe-
tence is sometimes easier to identify in its absence than it is to specify what
a proficient level of practical or scientific expertise involves" (pp. 154-155),
we suggest that specific competencies can be identified, evaluated, and
developed. From the output-model perspective, these competencies consist
of unique assemblages of discrete clinical abilities that incorporate the spe-
cific knowledge, skills, values, emotions, etc., required to perform the specific
professional activity (e.g., psychological assessment, family therapy, and
cognitive-behavioral therapy). Because the competencies required involve
distinct assemblages of abilities, they require supervision and training relating
to the input model, which directs attention to the development of specific
skills. As will be presented in the chapters that follow, supervision practices
attuned to the unique constituents required to perform a specific clinical
activity can be used to heighten awareness and to build competence.
In clinical training, the assessment of competence refers to the suffi-
ciency or coincidence of an individual's abilities in relation to an externally
defined training requirement. Although both the student and the licensed
practitioner are duty bound to practice competently, the measure of compe-
tence for a graduate student is not the same as that for a licensed practitioner
or for an expert. In competency-based supervision, explicit measurable stan-
dards of competence are established relative to the training requirements
within a developmental trajectory. For example, the initial standard of
competence in psychological assessment for a first-year graduate student
might be established as the ability to administer a test in compliance with
the instructions and to score the instrument accurately. Later in the training
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION

=== PAGE 11 ===
rotation, the definition of competence will be expanded to include the
ability to interpret test scores in light of the research literature; later still,
the production of a concise, well-written report will be the measure of
competence. Through the use of this competency-based perspective, accurate
assessments of performance can be obtained with a high degree of specificity
and reliability. Rather than providing a global assessment of competence,
formative and summative evaluations focus on the applications of specific
knowledge, skills, and values, which lead to targeted development that will
have been articulated in the training agreement or contract.
OUTCOMES OF SUPERVISION
In general terms, supervision monitors and ensures competency in
client care and contributes to the education and training of a psychologist.
The most important task of the supervisor is to monitor the supervisee's
conduct to ensure that appropriate and ethical professional practices are
implemented leading to the best possible clinical outcome for the client.
Quality assurance is the primary ethical responsibility of the supervisor
and supersedes educative, training, and evaluative functions. Supervision
provides the structure and framework for learning how to apply knowledge,
theory, and clinical procedures to solve human problems. Such experience
complements academic and research training, transfers applied knowledge
and skills, and establishes competencies in science-informed clinical prac-
tice. Socialization to the profession goes hand in hand with the development
of clinical competence. Supervision provides a relationship in which profes-
sional values, commitments, and identity are formed and career goals are
formulated. In addition to enhancing clinical competence, intermediate
outcomes include increases in role assimilation, self-assessment, and self-
efficacy as trainees advance through the practicum, internship, and fellow-
ship training that lead to licensure. Ultimately, the outcome of supervision
is to support the entire process of professional development that leads to
competency as a psychologist and to enable the supervisee to assume the
role of a colleague who contributes to the community and to the field.
Formative and summative feedback is provided to the supervisee and to
those responsible for monitoring the supervisee's professional development,
through the formal structure of the training agreement or contract and
associated evaluative procedures. The supervisor formally evaluates and
verifies the supervisee's competence and readiness to assume the next level
of training or professional development. The assessment and gatekeeper
functions are important aspects of supervision and constitute the supervisor's
responsibilities to the supervisee, the education and training institutions,
the profession, and ultimately the public. A further outcome associated
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

=== PAGE 12 ===
with the evaluative function is the supervisor's consultation with academic
programs and others involved in the education and training of psychologists,
whereby the supervisor provides feedback which ensure that adequate prepa-
ration is being provided to beginning practitioners of psychology to meet
present and future psychological service needs.
Supervision also provides tacit training in the practice of supervision
itself. One inevitable outcome of supervision is that a supervisee's experi-
ences form the basis for his or her own future conduct of supervision.
Supervision is integral not only to clinical training, but also to the whole
developmental and professional trajectory. The sum of one's experiences in
supervision influences the development of attitudes and skills that will
support meaningful self-assessment and contributes to lifelong increases in
competence. We turn now to the approaches that inform the process of
clinical supervision.
APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION
A review of the literature finds a gradual acknowledgment of supervi-
sion as a distinct competence, and although systematic approaches (J. M.
Bernard & Goodyear, 1998; Falender et al., in press; Watkins, 1997b) have
been proposed, there are probably as many approaches to supervision as
there are supervisors. Some approaches may focus on the interaction, "a
quintessential interpersonal interaction with the general goal that one per-
son, the supervisor, meets with another, the supervisee, in an effort to make
the latter more effective in helping people" (Hess, 1980a, p. 25), whereas
others emphasize the development of technical skills through "an inter-
personally focused, one-to-one relationship in which one person is desig-
nated to facilitate the development of the therapeutic competence in the
other person" (Loganbill, Hardy, & Delworth, 1982, p. 4). Some approaches
are client focused, didactic, and aimed at better understanding the client
(Dewald, 1987), whereas others stress multiple roles, considering supervision
to be a form of management in which teaching within the context of a
relationship enhances competence (Peterson, Peterson, Abrams, & Strieker,
1997, p. 377). Furthermore, despite the availability of theory and knowledge,
we find that many, if not most, supervisors practice without the benefit of
education, training, or supervision (ASPPB Task Force on Supervision
Guidelines, 1998; Scott, Ingram, Vitanza, & Smith, 2000). Without such
experience, it is likely that supervisors' behaviors are based on implicit
models of supervision, culled from their experiences as a supervisee, from
their identifications with past supervisors, or from skills derived from psycho-
therapy or teaching. Although such informal "training" is inherently limited
and subject to many potential inadequacies, it has been the usual avenue
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION

=== PAGE 13 ===
for training in supervision throughout the history of applied psychology
(Tipton, 1996).
Originally, academically trained psychologists obtained supervised ex-
perience through placement in hospitals and mental health clinics as interns.
The clinical staff was assigned the responsibility for training the interns and
relied on their expertise as psychotherapists for this task. The practice of
supervision drew liberally from clinical theories and adopted psychotherapy-
based methods. This approach to supervision was based in part on the
unexamined assumption that clinical knowledge and skills are readily trans-
ferable to the supervisory situation and, as such, afford sufficient preparation
to oversee cases and to provide training. Early supervisory practice empha-
sized the authority of the supervisor, and the master—apprentice model of
the supervisory relationship was thereby initiated (Binder & Strupp, 1997b,
p. 44). Initially, didactic consultation was directed to the dynamics of the
patient's behavior; however, with the publication of Ekstein and Waller-
stein's The Teaching and Learning of Psychotherapy (1958), attention shifted
in both content and process to the psychology of the supervisee. Supervision
became primarily an experiential, rather than didactic, process in which
the resistances, anxieties, and learning problems of the supervisee were
brought into focus (Frawley-O'Dea & Sarnat, 2001, p. 34). With this devel-
opment, supervision offered different emphases; attention was primarily
directed either to the dynamics of the patient or to the dynamics of the
supervisee and was conducted in either a didactic or a process-oriented
manner.
During this stage in the development of supervision practice, personal
experience of having been supervised remained the primary resource through
which novice supervisors learned and conducted supervision. Without the
benefit of an alternative pedagogical perspective, what had seemed to be
sufficient training was perpetuated, including the errors inherent in previous
supervisory practices (E. L. Worthington, 1987). Although such an approach
accomplished the task of transferring professional practices from one genera-
tion of clinicians to the next, the distinctive nature of the tasks and processes
was obscured; as a consequence, the need for specialized training in supervi-
sion went unrecognized.
With the evolution of professional psychology from a field with fewer
than 7,500 members in 1950 to a field consisting of almost 84,000 members
50 years later (American Psychological Association [APA], 2002d), ad-
vances obtained through psychotherapy research and the investigation of
process and outcome dimensions (Bergin & Garfield, 1994) led to initiatives
to establish evidence-based practice (Chambless & Hollon, 1998; Clinical
Treatment and Services Research Workgroup, 1998; Task Force on Promo-
tion and Dissemination of Psychological Procedures, 1995). Complementing
the increased focus on the requirement to empirically demonstrate efficacy,
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

=== PAGE 14 ===
attention, particularly within counseling psychology, turned to clinical train-
ing, and a burgeoning literature focusing on the process and outcomes of
supervision began to emerge. Over the past 20 years, a number of models
of supervision have been introduced that are intended to better describe
and scientifically investigate the supervision process and to improve the
quality of training.
Like J. M. Bernard and Goodyear (1998, p. 16), we have found it
useful to classify approaches to supervision according to whether they are
extensions of psychotherapy theory or are developed specifically for supervi-
sion; we refer to the latter category as process-based approaches. In light of
their contributions to our understanding of the process of supervision, we
include discussion of developmental models (Loganbill et al., 1982; Stolten-
berg & McNeill, 1997; Stoltenberg, McNeill, & Delworth, 1998; see also
Watkins, 1995b); however, we view these approaches to be primarily descrip-
tive rather than prescriptive.
Psychotherapy-Based Approaches
Supervision originally incorporated clinical approaches and tech-
niques. This approach continues to inform practice in which supervision
models have been developed for each of the major theoretical orientations,
including psychodynamic (Binder & Strupp, 1997b; Dewald, 1987, 1997;
Ekstein & Wallerstein, 1972; Frawley-O'Dea & Sarnat, 2001; Rock, 1997),
cognitive and cognitive-behavioral (Friedberg & Taylor, 1994; Fruzzetti,
Waltz, & Linehan, 1997; Liese & Beck, 1997; Milne & James, 2000; Ferris,
1994; Rosenbaum & Ronen, 1998; Woods & Ellis, 1997), client centered and
existential-humanistic (Mahrer & Boulet, 1997; Patterson, 1997; Sterling &
Bugental, 1993), intersubjective (Bob, 1999), and systemic and family systems
(Breunlin, Rampage, & Eovaldi, 1995; Liddle, Becker, & Diamond, 1997;
Liddle, Breunlin, & Schwartz, 1988; Storm, Todd, Sprenkle, & Morgan,
2001). Psychotherapy-based approaches are incorporated into the supervisory
process in a number of ways. Inevitably, theoretical orientation informs the
observation and selection of clinical data for discussion in supervision as well
as the meanings and relevance of those data. For example, observable cogni-
tions and behaviors are of primary consideration for cognitive-behavioral
therapists, whereas affective reactions and subjective experiences of the
therapist are of likely interest to psychodynamic clinicians (Frawley-O'Dea
& Sarnat, 2001; Liese & Beck, 1997; Rock, 1997). Also, the skills associated
with the use of specific, theory-based interventions will necessarily shape
the focus of training within supervision. To illustrate, Woods and Ellis
(1997), writing from a rational—emotive behavioral-therapy perspective,
encourage their supervisees to acquire skills in being "active-directive persua-
sive teachers of REBT theory and practice . . . [and] to often monitor and
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION

=== PAGE 15 ===
dispute their own irrationalities... to serve as reasonably good role models"
(p. 112). Systemic supervisors consider the roles and functions of the entire
system in assessing clinical and supervisory processes and relationships,
whereas the narrative approach, which is intersubjective, focuses on the
dialogue that explores the constructed realities of client, supervisee, and
supervisor (Bob, 1999). Furthermore, practices that have been identified as
helpful in the treatment setting are adapted for use in supervision. For
example, cognitive-behavioral therapy techniques (e.g., agenda setting,
homework, and capsule summaries) are directly applied in supervision for
that orientation (Liese & Beck, 1997, p. 121).
Incorporation of perspectives and techniques drawn from models of
psychotherapy may be inevitable, as clinical orientation substantively contri-
butes to the supervisor's worldview and directly influences beliefs about how
learning best occurs (J. M. Bernard & Goodyear, 1998, p. 18). One advantage
of psychotherapy-based approaches is that clinical techniques used in the
therapeutic process may be demonstrated and modeled within the dynamics
of the supervisory relationship, and a seamless consistency of conceptualiza-
tion may thereby occur. However, these approaches may prove to be the
Scylla and Charybdis in supervisory practice. Although clinical techniques
may at first glance seem to offer effective heuristics for learning and consis-
tency in focus, such approaches, if solely applied, are limited in their ability
to address the multiple responsibilities involved in supervision. The aims
of supervision are not equivalent to those of psychotherapy, and therefore
the approaches and learning strategies used in supervision must be specifically
tailored to accomplish the goals of clinical oversight and clinical training.
Developmental Approaches
Developmental models of supervision (Loganbill et al., 1982; Sansbury,
1982; Stoltenberg et al., 1998) are metatheoretical (Watkins, 1995b) and
readily applicable to varying theoretical persuasions. Each presents a devel-
opmental sequence in which the novice therapist progresses through stages
to become a seasoned or master therapist. In some of the models, stages
have been identified such as stagnation, confusion, and integration (Logan-
bill et al.); excitement and anticipatory anxiety; dependency and identifica-
tion; exuberance and taking charge; and identity and independence (Fried-
man & Kaslow, 1986). Models have also been proposed that emphasize
skill-based progression (Grater, 1985), emotional characteristics (Friedman
& Kaslow, 1986), or a combination (Hogan, 1964) thereof, including atten-
tion to awareness, motivation, and autonomy of the developing trainee
(Stoltenberg et al., 1998). The integrated developmental model (IDM),
originally developed by Stoltenberg (1981) and Stoltenberg and Delworth
(1987) and refined by Stoltenberg et al., is the most comprehensive model
10 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

=== PAGE 16 ===
available today and is summarized in Exhibit 1.1. This model considers the
trainee's cognitive and affective awareness of the client, motivation relating
to perceived efforts, enthusiasm, and investment across time, as well as the
client's autonomy, individuation, and independence. It proposes a sequence
of development from increasing autonomy to shifting of awareness from self
to client and finally to independent functioning. As the supervisee progresses,
the behavior of the supervisor is adjusted to correspond to the appropriate
developmental level. Specific supervisory behavior is spelled out in
Exhibit 1.1 and more thoroughly in Stoltenberg et al. The Supervisee Levels
Questionnaire (McNeill, Stoltenberg, & Romans, 1992) has been proposed
to assess the developmental stage of the trainee. A developmental trajectory
does exist; however, in light of the unique strengths and competencies that
supervisees, including novices, bring to training, a priori assumptions applied
to individual supervisees are not particularly helpful. We present a simple
sketch, based on supervisory experiences, of some of the components of a
broadly conceived developmental approach. As it is derived from nonsystem-
atic and personal observation, its tenets require empirical investigation to
establish its validity and further testing to propose its utility.
In addition, developmental theories have been proposed for the super-
visor (Stoltenberg et al., 1998; Watkins, 1993; see Table 1.1, this chap.),
internship director (Lamb, Anderson, Rapp, Rathnow, & Sesan, 1986; Lamb,
Roehlke, & Butler, 1986), and intern and postdoctoral fellow (Kaslow &
Deering, 1994; Kaslow & Rice, 1985; Lamb, Baker, Jennings, & Yarris,
1982; Lipovsky, 1988). The theories of supervisor development share many
of the characteristics of the supervisee developmental models: They are
metatheoretical, sequential, and progress to a fixed endpoint. Supervisor
developmental models have been articulated by Stoltenberg at al. (1998),
Watkins (1993), Rodenhauser (1994), and Hess (1986, 1987b). Watkins
(1993) described the primary issues that supervisors confront across the
developmental process: competency-incompetency (the degree to which
one feels competent to perform as a supervisor), autonomy-dependency
(the degree of independence with which one performs), identity-identity
diffusion (the degree of identification versus confusion with one's supervisory
role), and self-awareness-unawareness (one's degree of awareness concerning
the role and process of supervision). To progress, supervisors must establish
favorable ratios within the continuums of these issues. The novice supervisor
experiences "role shock," or the phenomenon of feeling like an imposter
as a supervisor. The progression moves through recovery and transition with
enhanced identity formation to role consolidation and eventual mastery.
Although his results are not empirically supported, Watkins (1993) pre-
dicted that higher stage supervisors would show higher levels of identity
and skill and be more competent, self-aware, and autonomous; more facilita-
tive in supervisee growth; perceived more favorably by supervisees; and more
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
11

=== PAGE 17 ===
EXHIBIT 1.1
Stoltenberg, McNeill, and Delworth's Theory
Characteristics of levels of supervisee development. (Development is domain specific
and will occur at different times and rates across the eight domains addressed in
the book.)
Level-1 Supervisee
• exhibits high anxiety
• exhibits high motivation
• is dependent on the supervisor
• focuses predominantly on the self, particularly on performance of technique or
following of guidelines
• is fearful of evaluation
Supervisor of Level-1 Supervisee
should be supportive and prescriptive
should provide structure and positive feedback
should use minimal direct confrontation
should have the supervisee work with only mildly distressed clients
should institute observation and role-play
should put theory on the back burner to emphasize and encourage
conceptualization, skill acquisition and development, self-monitoring of skill
development, and attention to the client response to therapeutic intervention
Level-2 supervisees can be excellent Level-1 supervisors.
Methods to Foster Transition from Level 1 to Level 2
encourage increased autonomy
begin reduction in structure
encourage new techniques rather than familiar ones only
foster focus on the client and his or her reactions and process
Level-2 Supervisee
is going through "trial and tribulation" period
experiences dependency-autonomy conflicts
has fluctuating confidence and motivation levels
shifts focus to the client, with increased empathy
links mood to success with clients
has an increased understanding of own limitations
uses therapeutic self in interventions
demonstrates uneven theoretical and conceptual integration
is sensitive and anxious about evaluation
Supervisor of Level-2 Supervisee
balances the fostering of autonomy with support and structure
desires to increase autonomy and confidence within realistic boundaries of
competence
introduces and considers countertransference
deals with self, defensiveness, transference, affect, and the supervisory
relationship
articulates theory and conceptual frames
challenges and uses catalytic interventions, stirring up and increasing awareness
helps the supervisee identify and understand his or her strengths and
weaknesses
accepts deidealization of him- or herself
monitors use of videotapes and direct observation
promotes multiple theoretical conceptualizations of the same
(continued)
12 
CLINICAL S UPERVISION

=== PAGE 18 ===
EXHIBIT 1.1
Stoltenberg, McNeill, and Delworth's Theory (continued)
Level-3 Supervisee
exudes an attitude of "calm after the storm"
exhibits stable motivation
is secure with autonomy
focuses on the client, process, and self
has professional identity at the core of his or her treatment
is not disabled by remaining doubts
accepts own strengths and weaknesses
exhibits high empathy and understanding
uses the therapeutic self in interventions
integrates client information, personal responses, theoretical information, and
empirical information
may find it a challenge to be flexible in approach
has accurate empathy that is tempered by objectivity and processing of
reactions, feelings, and thoughts
has a high level of insight into personal strengths and weaknesses
addresses areas of weakness with increased confidence and nondefensiveness
Supervisor of Level-3 Supervisees
carefully assesses consistency in performance areas across domains
works towards integration across domains
continues careful monitoring
emphasizes autonomy and growth
avoids creating an intrusive and overly structured supervisory environment
creates a supportive supervisory environment
engages in confrontation
devotes attention to parallel process, countertransference, and the
supervisor-supervisee relationship
focuses on leading the supervisee to make personal self-discoveries
interacts with empathy and in a nonjudgmental manner, with encouragement of
experimentation and exploration
provides advice concerning professional development and job searches as needed
Methods to Foster Transition from Level 2 to Level 3
encourage movement towards stable motivation across domains
foster flexibility to autonomously move conceptually and behaviorally across
domains
encourage creation of a solid professional identity
encourage development of a personalized understanding across domains
encourage assessment of the impact of personal events on professional life
Summarized from Stoltenberg, McNeill, and Delworth (1998).
effective in dealing with transference and countertransference, boundary
issues, and conflict in the supervisory relationship.
We believe that the novice supervisor has significant entry-role insecu-
rity, which may be manifested in rigidity; a crisis orientation; the personaliza-
tion of trainee performance, errors, and feedback; or flip-flopping between
being unforgiving, enthusiastic, and oversupervising. As the supervisor gains
experience, his or her confidence grows and his or her personal identity as a
supervisor is consolidated. He or she begins to take appropriate responsibility
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
13

=== PAGE 19 ===
+->
(D
Q.
0
O
TABLE 1.1
Theories of Supervisor Dev
£ ? 
<"
•^ CD > 
^
C"O 
O CD O
O ~ > t O
Stage 3
confirmation of supervis
identity; strong sense of
tity, excitement about in
ment; less work and mo
relationship; increased f
on learning agenda
Stage 2
Exploration: feelings of greater
confidence; greater effective-
ness; stronger ability to evalu-
ate work; may be too intrusive
or restrictive in roles employed
E
Stage 1
Beginning: movement fro
supervisee to supervisor;
lack of awareness of is-
sues; sensitivity to feed-
back; self-consciousness
focus on teaching
CD
CO
CO
CO
CDi
"o
.2 ^_
P. Q
O CO
c E
^f||
"35 D D) CD
> CO Q) Q.
CD CO ^ 
^
_l <t .£ co
Level 3
Stable and consistent
motivation
Level 2
Still high levels of confusion
and conflict; fluctuating motiva-
tion; overfocus on supervisee
or loss of focus in general;
temptation to provide therapy
to trainees; continuation of
search for comfort areas
JO 
-£
Level 1
Strong expert roles; reli-
ance on recent supervise
as models; high anxiety;
preference for a structure
feedback format
TO
CD 
08^-
CD CD § 00"
±± Z 5 0)
0 0 ^ 05
CO
'OT= . ."0 
, co
o > .$" co 
.2? ^
O 
•£ >, ^ -~* CO
•>.*- 
CD — CD -^ to
^ (E !2 ffi ~S OF
^l|sl||i
D) Q °- TO CO | -k" W
^5"o^S^-j= OCD
w r r B . e c o o S c
-D 
C
CD 
£
CO 
§ M_
Stage 3
Role Consolidation: incr
confidence; more realist
appraisals of skills; mon
pletely developed sense
identity; transference an
countertransference are
identified
Stage 2
Recovery and Transition: first
steps are taken towards super-
visory identity formation;
strengths are recognized; con-
fidence increases; identity be-
gins to form; a more realistic
appraisal of self is developed
•x 
«p .• , 
o
Stage 1
Role Shock: experience (
"imposter phenomenon";
awareness of weaknesse
lack of identity as superv
sor; feeling of being over
whelmed; sensitivity to
feedback; may withdraw
"attack" supervisees
o.-g
Iglaoj
5™ 38 i
£ c
Q.'
•<- w 3 "CD
° O C0"0
c •£-£ R
o~ o E
*lfll
&§I«1
« o i o 2
cno ^ '-a to
If
±= (O
Stage III
Incorporation: Learning
supervision is a relation:
Stage II
Conceptualization: A personal
search for concepts
_
Stage 1
Unconscious identificatiol
with or unconscious
emulation of one's formei
supervisor
CD
CO
CO
C £—•
CD n~
"O O5
o ^
co
CD
«.>,
CD c
Q-o
- 0-c
— ® %
<1> 
£0.
TO.E 
Q)
<?, 2 "a
COH.E
o 
.-•§!
2 $ r?W
!=; c S° £
Stage III
Responsibility for structi
supervision shifts to trail
self-evaluation is encoui
supervisor acts as a cor
Stage II
Supervisor takes responsibility
for structuring and managing
the supervision sessions; roles
are teacher and counselor
c
-9 cLQ
Stage 1
Establishment and definit
of supervisory relationshi
supervisory role is used 1
facilitate goal setting
a>
Q) 
m
0)c8^
£-S §
e o o
_ICQ_J
14
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

=== PAGE 20 ===
and to develop a normative sense of trainee development and predictability
in some supervisory patterns. As the supervisor continues to consolidate his
or her experience and identity, a greater sense of security is manifested in
the supervisor's openness and eagerness to learn and receive input from
supervisees and his or her increased empathy, enthusiasm, and synthesis of
all aspects of theory, science-based practice, values, and experience. We
believe that there is no final phase of supervisor development: Even the
most senior supervisor, in performing as a mentor and leader, is fostering
the innovation and development of others and is continuing to evolve and
develop him- or herself.
Developmental models that focus on multicultural counseling compe-
tence and multicultural supervision (Carney & Kahn, 1984; D'Andrea &
Daniels, 1997; Leong & Wagner, 1994), racial consciousness identity (as
described in chap. 6, this volume; Helms, 1990; Sabnani, Ponterotto, &
Borodovsky, 1991) and specific clinical skills such as psychodiagnostics
(Finkelstein & Tuckman, 1997) have also been proposed. These models
reflect the importance of tailoring training to insure diversity competence.
Developmental approaches potentially contribute to the establishment
of congruence in expectations and roles in supervision and encourage super-
visory behavior appropriate to the needs of the supervisee. Although devel-
opmental approaches are heuristically appealing and convey "experiential
validity" (Sansbury, 1982), empirical support for them has not been obtained.
The research literature, when reviewed as a whole (Ellis & Ladany, 1997;
Stoltenberg, McNeill, & Crethar, 1994; Watkins, 1995b), identifies only a
small proportion of the studies completed that met criteria for methodologi-
cal inclusion. The shortcomings, including very small sample size, redundant
supervisor ratings, total reliance on self-reports, statistical irregularities, and
insufficient research models (Ellis &. Ladany, 1997; Ellis, Ladany, Krengel,
& Schult, 1996), have led to a veritable methodological morass. Ellis and
Ladany (1997) reported that "the overall quality of research during the
past 15 years was substandard" (p. 492) and concluded that developmental
"theories and the central premises of these remain untested" (p. 493). They
suggested that the process of supervision is more complex than connoted
in the current models and that perhaps other aspects of trainee experience
or personality have a similar or greater impact than that of supervision.
In addition to the failure to conclusively establish empirical support,
a number of practical considerations limit the utility of developmental
approaches in the clinical setting. Homogeneity is not present within or
across training levels, and often disciplines are combined without consider-
ation to differences in orientation to training, experience, and supervision
(e.g., clinical psychology and counseling psychology students and interns
at all levels of training, psychiatric residents, social work trainees, and
marriage and family trainees). Further, aspects important to clinical practice,
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
15
