ever, their full expression in the supervisory relationship requires thoughtful
and deliberate attention. Supervisors may assume that there is integrity in
the relationship, because there are no breaches or boundary violations.
However, subtle affirmations or detractions influence the full development of
integrity in the relationship, which will support and enhance the supervisory
working alliance. For example, consistently being on time or fully attending
to a supervisee's exploration of an issue rather than simply offering a sugges-
tion affects the relationship's integrity. Similarly, appreciation of diversity
requires consistent attention and skill, particularly if one aims for a compre-
hensive understanding of the ever present influence of culture rather than
a superficial and stereotypic assessment of the role of ethnicity in treatment.
Attention to these values, as well as to faithfully fulfilling each of the
responsibilities of a supervisor (i.e., case management, teaching, consulta-
tion, supervision, and evaluation), contributes to values-based ethical prac-
tice. Maintenance of boundaries with respect to overt behavior, the subtlety
of attraction, respectfulness in the use of authority, avoidance of inappropri-
ate dual relationships of any kind, including conducting psychotherapy in
the guise of supervision, supports ethical practice. Further, as a values-based
relationship, supervision can provide the experience of a host of human
values—genuineness, empathy, commitment to another's welfare, and fidel-
ity to professionalism and to the highest standards of client care, to name
a few. Also, values are expressed in facilitating the development of competen-
cies by identifying talents that will become strengths, rather than focusing
on weaknesses and creating an environment composed solely of criticism.
Respect infused throughout the program goes a long way toward creating
an environment in which evaluation can be accepted and integrated. The
task of integrating science and practice requires that a trusting collaborative
relationship be formed that will allow for application of evidence-based
practices and a scientific perspective to the analysis of the psychotherapy
and supervisory processes.
LOOKING TO THE FUTURE
Supervision practices are at the front line of efforts to train practitioners
to address the needs of an increasingly diverse population within health
care systems that are continuing to reshape the nature of service delivery.
Psychologists, more than ever before, must be able to apply their clinical skills
in novel ways within the changing clinical landscape. Clinical competencies
viewed as knowledge, skills, and values, which are uniquely assembled to
address the needs of the local clinical situation, provide a useful orientation.
Supervisors can enhance this perspective by focusing on the portability of
competencies rather than orienting training in a parochial manner, which
EVOLVING PRACTICE 
231

focuses learning exclusively on how to conduct a particular form of treatment.
Norcross and Halgin (1997), in presenting an approach to integrative ap-
proaches to supervision, opined, "The emphasis should be placed squarely
on 'how to think' rather than on 'what to think.' This modified focus
engenders informed pluralism and self-evolving clinical styles, in contrast
to young disciples or mindless imitators" (p. 218). Plato differentiated two
classes of doctors, the slave doctors, who "acquire their knowledge of medi-
cine by obeying and observing their masters" and "never talk to their patients
individually, [merely prescribing] what mere experience suggests," and the
true doctors, "who have learned scientifically[,] . . . attending] and prac-
tic[ing] on freemen[,] . . . [carrying their] enquires far back and [going] into
the nature of the disorder" (as cited in Jackson, 1999, p. 41). Supervision
endeavors to instill reflective professional practice (Schon, 1983, 1987) and
the perspective of a clinical scientist, which requires the ability to know
how to think clinically. Supervision must also be responsive to developments
in psychology (Norcross, Hedges, & Prochaska, 2002), such as advances in
empirically supported treatments (Addis, 2002), changes in the roles of
psychologists to include facets of primary health-care provision (R. T. Brown
et al., 2002), the inclusion of psychopharmacology, and innovation in
science-based practice (Beutler, 2000).
The practice of clinical supervision requires further investigation to
ensure the development of effective methods, particularly with respect to
the integration of science and practice, the integration of legal and ethical
considerations into all levels, the development of cultural and diversity
competency, and formative and summative evaluation, leading to bench-
marks of competency. An empirical, evidence-based, theoretical foundation
is required. As with other competencies, training in supervision will best
occur through coordinated articulation between graduate education and
clinical training experiences, through which knowledge, skills, and attitudes
are assembled, leading to competent practice. We need not be bewildered
by the changing clinical landscape; new perspectives can lead supervisors
to look forward to ever expanding opportunities to contribute to the profes-
sional development of the next generation of psychologists who will serve
the community.
232 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

APPENDIX A
Sample Supervision Contract Outline
The Sample Supervision Contract Outline is designed to illustrate
dimensions that could be included in such a document. It is organized with
sections to represent definition of supervisor roles, definition of supervisee
roles, and definition of the relationship. Development of such a contract
serves an important role in the development of the relationship and supervi-
sory alliance. Furthermore, it serves a significant role in invocation of the
role of the supervisee by clearly defining the expectations and parameters the
supervisor requires. This document is intended to be an example. Individual
programs will develop contracts to correspond to their specific settings and
requirements. The contract was developed by Falender in 2003.
This is an agreement between 
(Supervisee)
and 
(Supervisor and Agency/Setting).
Effective Dates:
The purpose of supervision is (e.g., to meet requirements for internship,
to prepare the supervisee for licensure)
Clear definition of what the supervisor will provide to the
setting (which will be included in a supervision contract dur-
ing the first two weeks of the supervision period).
• Frequency, length, duration, and type of supervision to be
provided (specify individual or group) and attendance
requirement.
• Specific areas of supervisory competence (please define), in-
cluding educational and supervisory experience and multicul-
tural competence.
• Supervisor will be respectful of and address cultural and
diversity differences in the supervisor-supervisee-client(s)
triad.
• Supervision model(s) and theories, including the develop-
mental model.
233
