Supervision Impact
Provides teaching that generalizes or transcends individual cases to
strengthen therapist's general skill level.
Shows concern for therapist's personal development as well as intern-
ship performance.
Furthers therapist's self-understanding as professional.
Facilitates therapist's self-confidence to accept new challenges.
Assists therapist in forming a more crystallized theoretical orientation
or professional identify.
Comments:
Note. From Supervisor Feedback by S. Hall-Marley, 2001. Copyright 2001 by S. Hall-Marley. Reprinted
with permission.
APPENDIX K 
275


APPENDIX L
Therapist Evaluation Checklist
Hall-Marley (2000) developed the Therapist Evaluation Checklist, an
evaluation form used to give feedback to trainees. Sections include con-
tributes to clinical team, capacity for professional development, general
psychotherapy skills (case management, assessment, intervention), and
evaluator comments. This sample trainee evaluation form provides a basic
structure for performance and competency assessment. It is essential to
yoke the evaluation to the contract and stated programmatic expectations
for completion.
THERAPIST EVALUATION CHECKLIST
The present level of each skill should be rated as follows:
s 
Strength
/ 
Ability commensurate with level of training
? 
Insufficient data
n 
Needs improvement (must specify)
na 
Not applicable
Any rating of "needs improvement" must be accompanied by specific
recommendations in the comments section. Raters are encouraged to provide
narrative commentary as opposed to simple ratings when possible.
I. CONTRIBUTES TO CLINICAL TEAM
is conscientious, fulfills responsibilities without reminders, and is
productive
is accepting and cooperative toward staff at all levels; forms posi-
tive relationships
establishes effective supervisory alliance
exercises good judgment in seeking help
exercises good judgment when acting independently
contributes to task completion and cohesion in meetings
has exhibited increased autonomy over the course of the year
makes outside communications that reflect positively on the agency
277
