1
THE PRACTICE OF
CLINICAL SUPERVISION
Supervised practice is the cornerstone in the education and training
of a psychologist (ASPPB Task Force on Supervision Guidelines, 1998;
Russell & Petrie, 1994, p. 27). It provides the experiential foundation for
the psychologist's knowledge, skills, and values to be consolidated and
applied. As an integral facet of such experience, clinical supervision serves
two essential and interrelated functions: to ensure the integrity of clinical
services provided to the client and to develop competence in the supervisee.
We define supervision as follows:
Supervision is a distinct professional activity in which education and
training aimed at developing science-informed practice are facilitated
through a collaborative interpersonal process. It involves observation,
evaluation, feedback, the facilitation of supervisee self-assessment, and
the acquisition of knowledge and skills by instruction, modeling, and
mutual problem solving. In addition, by building on the recognition of
the strengths and talents of the supervisee, supervision encourages self-
efficacy. Supervision ensures that clinical consultation is conducted in
a competent manner in which ethical standards, legal prescriptions,
and professional practices are used to promote and protect the welfare
of the client, the profession, and society at large.
In our view, effective supervision builds on three interrelated pillars:
the supervisory relationship, inquiry, and educational praxis. Each pillar

relies on and contributes to the others through a synergistic confluence,
either enhancing or compromising the supervisory process. The supervisory
relationship provides the foundation for the development of an alliance
in which the individual and shared responsibilities in the supervision of
clinical practice will be fulfilled. We suggest that the supervisory alliance
is, to a great extent, the result of the nature and quality of the relationship
that is formed between the supervisor and supervisee. Inquiry refers to
all the processes that facilitate critical understanding of the therapeutic
process as well as foster in the supervisee greater awareness of his or
her professional and personal contributions to it. Educational praxis
provides multiple learning strategies, including instruction, observation,
and role playing, tailored to enhance the supervisee's knowledge and to
develop his or her technical skills. These pillars represent the assemblage
of a number of professional competencies as well interpersonal skills,
personal strengths, and values.
Each pillar requires skillful attention to establish a supervisory pro-
cess in which the highest quality care and welfare of clients are assured
and clinical training objectives are met. These responsibilities are extremely
important and can be fulfilled only with a foundation of competent
supervisory practice. As a distinct professional activity, supervision in-
corporates many personal and professional competencies that require fur-
ther articulation, understanding, and development through professional
training.
This book presents a competency-based approach to supervision that
emphasizes the use of science-informed theory and practice. Without mini-
mizing the complexity of supervision or ignoring the present scientific stand-
ing of the field, we posit that the practice of supervision involves identifiable
competencies, which can be learned and in turn promote the supervisee's
clinical competence through the integration and application of specific
knowledge, skills, attitudes, and values. Furthermore, we present four super-
ordinate values that we believe to be integral to supervision and clinical
practice: integrity-in-relationship, ethical values-based practice, apprecia-
tion of diversity, and science-informed practice. Finally, we advocate for an
approach to supervision that recognizes the personal strengths supervisees
bring to their education and clinical training and, drawing on principles
derived from positive psychology, informs the learning process and leads to
increased competence and self-efficacy.
In this chapter, we discuss competence and the intended outcomes of
supervision. We then review the approaches to the practice of supervision
and present an overview of the competency-based approach, including the
four superordinate values that inform the process. We conclude with a
discussion of the structure of the book.
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

COMPETENCE
On the basis of Epstein and Hundert (2002), we define competence
to be "the habitual and judicious use of communication, knowledge, techni-
cal skills, clinical reasoning, emotions, values, and reflection in daily practice
for the benefit of the individual and the community being served" (p. 226).
Further, we consider competence to be the state of sufficiency relative to
the specific performance or training requirements within the given setting
in which such abilities are exercised. Competence therefore is not an abso-
lute, nor does it involve a narrow set of professional behaviors; rather,
competence reflects sufficiency of a broad spectrum of personal and professional
abilities relative to a given requirement. Roe (2002) distinguished between
input-model approaches to professional competency, which define the educa-
tional curricula necessary for one to become a psychologist, and the output-
model approaches, or approaches that emphasize the particular roles and
functions a psychologist should be able to perform. Although Kitchener
(2000) concluded that "it may be easier to require psychologists [and trainees]
to be competent than it is to define what competence means [and] compe-
tence is sometimes easier to identify in its absence than it is to specify what
a proficient level of practical or scientific expertise involves" (pp. 154-155),
we suggest that specific competencies can be identified, evaluated, and
developed. From the output-model perspective, these competencies consist
of unique assemblages of discrete clinical abilities that incorporate the spe-
cific knowledge, skills, values, emotions, etc., required to perform the specific
professional activity (e.g., psychological assessment, family therapy, and
cognitive-behavioral therapy). Because the competencies required involve
distinct assemblages of abilities, they require supervision and training relating
to the input model, which directs attention to the development of specific
skills. As will be presented in the chapters that follow, supervision practices
attuned to the unique constituents required to perform a specific clinical
activity can be used to heighten awareness and to build competence.
In clinical training, the assessment of competence refers to the suffi-
ciency or coincidence of an individual's abilities in relation to an externally
defined training requirement. Although both the student and the licensed
practitioner are duty bound to practice competently, the measure of compe-
tence for a graduate student is not the same as that for a licensed practitioner
or for an expert. In competency-based supervision, explicit measurable stan-
dards of competence are established relative to the training requirements
within a developmental trajectory. For example, the initial standard of
competence in psychological assessment for a first-year graduate student
might be established as the ability to administer a test in compliance with
the instructions and to score the instrument accurately. Later in the training
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION

rotation, the definition of competence will be expanded to include the
ability to interpret test scores in light of the research literature; later still,
the production of a concise, well-written report will be the measure of
competence. Through the use of this competency-based perspective, accurate
assessments of performance can be obtained with a high degree of specificity
and reliability. Rather than providing a global assessment of competence,
formative and summative evaluations focus on the applications of specific
knowledge, skills, and values, which lead to targeted development that will
have been articulated in the training agreement or contract.
OUTCOMES OF SUPERVISION
In general terms, supervision monitors and ensures competency in
client care and contributes to the education and training of a psychologist.
The most important task of the supervisor is to monitor the supervisee's
conduct to ensure that appropriate and ethical professional practices are
implemented leading to the best possible clinical outcome for the client.
Quality assurance is the primary ethical responsibility of the supervisor
and supersedes educative, training, and evaluative functions. Supervision
provides the structure and framework for learning how to apply knowledge,
theory, and clinical procedures to solve human problems. Such experience
complements academic and research training, transfers applied knowledge
and skills, and establishes competencies in science-informed clinical prac-
tice. Socialization to the profession goes hand in hand with the development
of clinical competence. Supervision provides a relationship in which profes-
sional values, commitments, and identity are formed and career goals are
formulated. In addition to enhancing clinical competence, intermediate
outcomes include increases in role assimilation, self-assessment, and self-
efficacy as trainees advance through the practicum, internship, and fellow-
ship training that lead to licensure. Ultimately, the outcome of supervision
is to support the entire process of professional development that leads to
competency as a psychologist and to enable the supervisee to assume the
role of a colleague who contributes to the community and to the field.
Formative and summative feedback is provided to the supervisee and to
those responsible for monitoring the supervisee's professional development,
through the formal structure of the training agreement or contract and
associated evaluative procedures. The supervisor formally evaluates and
verifies the supervisee's competence and readiness to assume the next level
of training or professional development. The assessment and gatekeeper
functions are important aspects of supervision and constitute the supervisor's
responsibilities to the supervisee, the education and training institutions,
the profession, and ultimately the public. A further outcome associated
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

with the evaluative function is the supervisor's consultation with academic
programs and others involved in the education and training of psychologists,
whereby the supervisor provides feedback which ensure that adequate prepa-
ration is being provided to beginning practitioners of psychology to meet
present and future psychological service needs.
Supervision also provides tacit training in the practice of supervision
itself. One inevitable outcome of supervision is that a supervisee's experi-
ences form the basis for his or her own future conduct of supervision.
Supervision is integral not only to clinical training, but also to the whole
developmental and professional trajectory. The sum of one's experiences in
supervision influences the development of attitudes and skills that will
support meaningful self-assessment and contributes to lifelong increases in
competence. We turn now to the approaches that inform the process of
clinical supervision.
APPROACHES TO SUPERVISION
A review of the literature finds a gradual acknowledgment of supervi-
sion as a distinct competence, and although systematic approaches (J. M.
Bernard & Goodyear, 1998; Falender et al., in press; Watkins, 1997b) have
been proposed, there are probably as many approaches to supervision as
there are supervisors. Some approaches may focus on the interaction, "a
quintessential interpersonal interaction with the general goal that one per-
son, the supervisor, meets with another, the supervisee, in an effort to make
the latter more effective in helping people" (Hess, 1980a, p. 25), whereas
others emphasize the development of technical skills through "an inter-
personally focused, one-to-one relationship in which one person is desig-
nated to facilitate the development of the therapeutic competence in the
other person" (Loganbill, Hardy, & Delworth, 1982, p. 4). Some approaches
are client focused, didactic, and aimed at better understanding the client
(Dewald, 1987), whereas others stress multiple roles, considering supervision
to be a form of management in which teaching within the context of a
relationship enhances competence (Peterson, Peterson, Abrams, & Strieker,
1997, p. 377). Furthermore, despite the availability of theory and knowledge,
we find that many, if not most, supervisors practice without the benefit of
education, training, or supervision (ASPPB Task Force on Supervision
Guidelines, 1998; Scott, Ingram, Vitanza, & Smith, 2000). Without such
experience, it is likely that supervisors' behaviors are based on implicit
models of supervision, culled from their experiences as a supervisee, from
their identifications with past supervisors, or from skills derived from psycho-
therapy or teaching. Although such informal "training" is inherently limited
and subject to many potential inadequacies, it has been the usual avenue
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION

for training in supervision throughout the history of applied psychology
(Tipton, 1996).
Originally, academically trained psychologists obtained supervised ex-
perience through placement in hospitals and mental health clinics as interns.
The clinical staff was assigned the responsibility for training the interns and
relied on their expertise as psychotherapists for this task. The practice of
supervision drew liberally from clinical theories and adopted psychotherapy-
based methods. This approach to supervision was based in part on the
unexamined assumption that clinical knowledge and skills are readily trans-
ferable to the supervisory situation and, as such, afford sufficient preparation
to oversee cases and to provide training. Early supervisory practice empha-
sized the authority of the supervisor, and the master—apprentice model of
the supervisory relationship was thereby initiated (Binder & Strupp, 1997b,
p. 44). Initially, didactic consultation was directed to the dynamics of the
patient's behavior; however, with the publication of Ekstein and Waller-
stein's The Teaching and Learning of Psychotherapy (1958), attention shifted
in both content and process to the psychology of the supervisee. Supervision
became primarily an experiential, rather than didactic, process in which
the resistances, anxieties, and learning problems of the supervisee were
brought into focus (Frawley-O'Dea & Sarnat, 2001, p. 34). With this devel-
opment, supervision offered different emphases; attention was primarily
directed either to the dynamics of the patient or to the dynamics of the
supervisee and was conducted in either a didactic or a process-oriented
manner.
During this stage in the development of supervision practice, personal
experience of having been supervised remained the primary resource through
which novice supervisors learned and conducted supervision. Without the
benefit of an alternative pedagogical perspective, what had seemed to be
sufficient training was perpetuated, including the errors inherent in previous
supervisory practices (E. L. Worthington, 1987). Although such an approach
accomplished the task of transferring professional practices from one genera-
tion of clinicians to the next, the distinctive nature of the tasks and processes
was obscured; as a consequence, the need for specialized training in supervi-
sion went unrecognized.
With the evolution of professional psychology from a field with fewer
than 7,500 members in 1950 to a field consisting of almost 84,000 members
50 years later (American Psychological Association [APA], 2002d), ad-
vances obtained through psychotherapy research and the investigation of
process and outcome dimensions (Bergin & Garfield, 1994) led to initiatives
to establish evidence-based practice (Chambless & Hollon, 1998; Clinical
Treatment and Services Research Workgroup, 1998; Task Force on Promo-
tion and Dissemination of Psychological Procedures, 1995). Complementing
the increased focus on the requirement to empirically demonstrate efficacy,
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

attention, particularly within counseling psychology, turned to clinical train-
ing, and a burgeoning literature focusing on the process and outcomes of
supervision began to emerge. Over the past 20 years, a number of models
of supervision have been introduced that are intended to better describe
and scientifically investigate the supervision process and to improve the
quality of training.
Like J. M. Bernard and Goodyear (1998, p. 16), we have found it
useful to classify approaches to supervision according to whether they are
extensions of psychotherapy theory or are developed specifically for supervi-
sion; we refer to the latter category as process-based approaches. In light of
their contributions to our understanding of the process of supervision, we
include discussion of developmental models (Loganbill et al., 1982; Stolten-
berg & McNeill, 1997; Stoltenberg, McNeill, & Delworth, 1998; see also
Watkins, 1995b); however, we view these approaches to be primarily descrip-
tive rather than prescriptive.
Psychotherapy-Based Approaches
Supervision originally incorporated clinical approaches and tech-
niques. This approach continues to inform practice in which supervision
models have been developed for each of the major theoretical orientations,
including psychodynamic (Binder & Strupp, 1997b; Dewald, 1987, 1997;
Ekstein & Wallerstein, 1972; Frawley-O'Dea & Sarnat, 2001; Rock, 1997),
cognitive and cognitive-behavioral (Friedberg & Taylor, 1994; Fruzzetti,
Waltz, & Linehan, 1997; Liese & Beck, 1997; Milne & James, 2000; Ferris,
1994; Rosenbaum & Ronen, 1998; Woods & Ellis, 1997), client centered and
existential-humanistic (Mahrer & Boulet, 1997; Patterson, 1997; Sterling &
Bugental, 1993), intersubjective (Bob, 1999), and systemic and family systems
(Breunlin, Rampage, & Eovaldi, 1995; Liddle, Becker, & Diamond, 1997;
Liddle, Breunlin, & Schwartz, 1988; Storm, Todd, Sprenkle, & Morgan,
2001). Psychotherapy-based approaches are incorporated into the supervisory
process in a number of ways. Inevitably, theoretical orientation informs the
observation and selection of clinical data for discussion in supervision as well
as the meanings and relevance of those data. For example, observable cogni-
tions and behaviors are of primary consideration for cognitive-behavioral
therapists, whereas affective reactions and subjective experiences of the
therapist are of likely interest to psychodynamic clinicians (Frawley-O'Dea
& Sarnat, 2001; Liese & Beck, 1997; Rock, 1997). Also, the skills associated
with the use of specific, theory-based interventions will necessarily shape
the focus of training within supervision. To illustrate, Woods and Ellis
(1997), writing from a rational—emotive behavioral-therapy perspective,
encourage their supervisees to acquire skills in being "active-directive persua-
sive teachers of REBT theory and practice . . . [and] to often monitor and
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION

dispute their own irrationalities... to serve as reasonably good role models"
(p. 112). Systemic supervisors consider the roles and functions of the entire
system in assessing clinical and supervisory processes and relationships,
whereas the narrative approach, which is intersubjective, focuses on the
dialogue that explores the constructed realities of client, supervisee, and
supervisor (Bob, 1999). Furthermore, practices that have been identified as
helpful in the treatment setting are adapted for use in supervision. For
example, cognitive-behavioral therapy techniques (e.g., agenda setting,
homework, and capsule summaries) are directly applied in supervision for
that orientation (Liese & Beck, 1997, p. 121).
Incorporation of perspectives and techniques drawn from models of
psychotherapy may be inevitable, as clinical orientation substantively contri-
butes to the supervisor's worldview and directly influences beliefs about how
learning best occurs (J. M. Bernard & Goodyear, 1998, p. 18). One advantage
of psychotherapy-based approaches is that clinical techniques used in the
therapeutic process may be demonstrated and modeled within the dynamics
of the supervisory relationship, and a seamless consistency of conceptualiza-
tion may thereby occur. However, these approaches may prove to be the
Scylla and Charybdis in supervisory practice. Although clinical techniques
may at first glance seem to offer effective heuristics for learning and consis-
tency in focus, such approaches, if solely applied, are limited in their ability
to address the multiple responsibilities involved in supervision. The aims
of supervision are not equivalent to those of psychotherapy, and therefore
the approaches and learning strategies used in supervision must be specifically
tailored to accomplish the goals of clinical oversight and clinical training.
Developmental Approaches
Developmental models of supervision (Loganbill et al., 1982; Sansbury,
1982; Stoltenberg et al., 1998) are metatheoretical (Watkins, 1995b) and
readily applicable to varying theoretical persuasions. Each presents a devel-
opmental sequence in which the novice therapist progresses through stages
to become a seasoned or master therapist. In some of the models, stages
have been identified such as stagnation, confusion, and integration (Logan-
bill et al.); excitement and anticipatory anxiety; dependency and identifica-
tion; exuberance and taking charge; and identity and independence (Fried-
man & Kaslow, 1986). Models have also been proposed that emphasize
skill-based progression (Grater, 1985), emotional characteristics (Friedman
& Kaslow, 1986), or a combination (Hogan, 1964) thereof, including atten-
tion to awareness, motivation, and autonomy of the developing trainee
(Stoltenberg et al., 1998). The integrated developmental model (IDM),
originally developed by Stoltenberg (1981) and Stoltenberg and Delworth
(1987) and refined by Stoltenberg et al., is the most comprehensive model
10 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

available today and is summarized in Exhibit 1.1. This model considers the
trainee's cognitive and affective awareness of the client, motivation relating
to perceived efforts, enthusiasm, and investment across time, as well as the
client's autonomy, individuation, and independence. It proposes a sequence
of development from increasing autonomy to shifting of awareness from self
to client and finally to independent functioning. As the supervisee progresses,
the behavior of the supervisor is adjusted to correspond to the appropriate
developmental level. Specific supervisory behavior is spelled out in
Exhibit 1.1 and more thoroughly in Stoltenberg et al. The Supervisee Levels
Questionnaire (McNeill, Stoltenberg, & Romans, 1992) has been proposed
to assess the developmental stage of the trainee. A developmental trajectory
does exist; however, in light of the unique strengths and competencies that
supervisees, including novices, bring to training, a priori assumptions applied
to individual supervisees are not particularly helpful. We present a simple
sketch, based on supervisory experiences, of some of the components of a
broadly conceived developmental approach. As it is derived from nonsystem-
atic and personal observation, its tenets require empirical investigation to
establish its validity and further testing to propose its utility.
In addition, developmental theories have been proposed for the super-
visor (Stoltenberg et al., 1998; Watkins, 1993; see Table 1.1, this chap.),
internship director (Lamb, Anderson, Rapp, Rathnow, & Sesan, 1986; Lamb,
Roehlke, & Butler, 1986), and intern and postdoctoral fellow (Kaslow &
Deering, 1994; Kaslow & Rice, 1985; Lamb, Baker, Jennings, & Yarris,
1982; Lipovsky, 1988). The theories of supervisor development share many
of the characteristics of the supervisee developmental models: They are
metatheoretical, sequential, and progress to a fixed endpoint. Supervisor
developmental models have been articulated by Stoltenberg at al. (1998),
Watkins (1993), Rodenhauser (1994), and Hess (1986, 1987b). Watkins
(1993) described the primary issues that supervisors confront across the
developmental process: competency-incompetency (the degree to which
one feels competent to perform as a supervisor), autonomy-dependency
(the degree of independence with which one performs), identity-identity
diffusion (the degree of identification versus confusion with one's supervisory
role), and self-awareness-unawareness (one's degree of awareness concerning
the role and process of supervision). To progress, supervisors must establish
favorable ratios within the continuums of these issues. The novice supervisor
experiences "role shock," or the phenomenon of feeling like an imposter
as a supervisor. The progression moves through recovery and transition with
enhanced identity formation to role consolidation and eventual mastery.
Although his results are not empirically supported, Watkins (1993) pre-
dicted that higher stage supervisors would show higher levels of identity
and skill and be more competent, self-aware, and autonomous; more facilita-
tive in supervisee growth; perceived more favorably by supervisees; and more
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
11

EXHIBIT 1.1
Stoltenberg, McNeill, and Delworth's Theory
Characteristics of levels of supervisee development. (Development is domain specific
and will occur at different times and rates across the eight domains addressed in
the book.)
Level-1 Supervisee
• exhibits high anxiety
• exhibits high motivation
• is dependent on the supervisor
• focuses predominantly on the self, particularly on performance of technique or
following of guidelines
• is fearful of evaluation
Supervisor of Level-1 Supervisee
should be supportive and prescriptive
should provide structure and positive feedback
should use minimal direct confrontation
should have the supervisee work with only mildly distressed clients
should institute observation and role-play
should put theory on the back burner to emphasize and encourage
conceptualization, skill acquisition and development, self-monitoring of skill
development, and attention to the client response to therapeutic intervention
Level-2 supervisees can be excellent Level-1 supervisors.
Methods to Foster Transition from Level 1 to Level 2
encourage increased autonomy
begin reduction in structure
encourage new techniques rather than familiar ones only
foster focus on the client and his or her reactions and process
Level-2 Supervisee
is going through "trial and tribulation" period
experiences dependency-autonomy conflicts
has fluctuating confidence and motivation levels
shifts focus to the client, with increased empathy
links mood to success with clients
has an increased understanding of own limitations
uses therapeutic self in interventions
demonstrates uneven theoretical and conceptual integration
is sensitive and anxious about evaluation
Supervisor of Level-2 Supervisee
balances the fostering of autonomy with support and structure
desires to increase autonomy and confidence within realistic boundaries of
competence
introduces and considers countertransference
deals with self, defensiveness, transference, affect, and the supervisory
relationship
articulates theory and conceptual frames
challenges and uses catalytic interventions, stirring up and increasing awareness
helps the supervisee identify and understand his or her strengths and
weaknesses
accepts deidealization of him- or herself
monitors use of videotapes and direct observation
promotes multiple theoretical conceptualizations of the same
(continued)
12 
CLINICAL S UPERVISION

EXHIBIT 1.1
Stoltenberg, McNeill, and Delworth's Theory (continued)
Level-3 Supervisee
exudes an attitude of "calm after the storm"
exhibits stable motivation
is secure with autonomy
focuses on the client, process, and self
has professional identity at the core of his or her treatment
is not disabled by remaining doubts
accepts own strengths and weaknesses
exhibits high empathy and understanding
uses the therapeutic self in interventions
integrates client information, personal responses, theoretical information, and
empirical information
may find it a challenge to be flexible in approach
has accurate empathy that is tempered by objectivity and processing of
reactions, feelings, and thoughts
has a high level of insight into personal strengths and weaknesses
addresses areas of weakness with increased confidence and nondefensiveness
Supervisor of Level-3 Supervisees
carefully assesses consistency in performance areas across domains
works towards integration across domains
continues careful monitoring
emphasizes autonomy and growth
avoids creating an intrusive and overly structured supervisory environment
creates a supportive supervisory environment
engages in confrontation
devotes attention to parallel process, countertransference, and the
supervisor-supervisee relationship
focuses on leading the supervisee to make personal self-discoveries
interacts with empathy and in a nonjudgmental manner, with encouragement of
experimentation and exploration
provides advice concerning professional development and job searches as needed
Methods to Foster Transition from Level 2 to Level 3
encourage movement towards stable motivation across domains
foster flexibility to autonomously move conceptually and behaviorally across
domains
encourage creation of a solid professional identity
encourage development of a personalized understanding across domains
encourage assessment of the impact of personal events on professional life
Summarized from Stoltenberg, McNeill, and Delworth (1998).
effective in dealing with transference and countertransference, boundary
issues, and conflict in the supervisory relationship.
We believe that the novice supervisor has significant entry-role insecu-
rity, which may be manifested in rigidity; a crisis orientation; the personaliza-
tion of trainee performance, errors, and feedback; or flip-flopping between
being unforgiving, enthusiastic, and oversupervising. As the supervisor gains
experience, his or her confidence grows and his or her personal identity as a
supervisor is consolidated. He or she begins to take appropriate responsibility
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
13

+->
(D
Q.
0
O
TABLE 1.1
Theories of Supervisor Dev
£ ? 
<"
•^ CD > 
^
C"O 
O CD O
O ~ > t O
Stage 3
confirmation of supervis
identity; strong sense of
tity, excitement about in
ment; less work and mo
relationship; increased f
on learning agenda
Stage 2
Exploration: feelings of greater
confidence; greater effective-
ness; stronger ability to evalu-
ate work; may be too intrusive
or restrictive in roles employed
E
Stage 1
Beginning: movement fro
supervisee to supervisor;
lack of awareness of is-
sues; sensitivity to feed-
back; self-consciousness
focus on teaching
CD
CO
CO
CO
CDi
"o
.2 ^_
P. Q
O CO
c E
^f||
"35 D D) CD
> CO Q) Q.
CD CO ^ 
^
_l <t .£ co
Level 3
Stable and consistent
motivation
Level 2
Still high levels of confusion
and conflict; fluctuating motiva-
tion; overfocus on supervisee
or loss of focus in general;
temptation to provide therapy
to trainees; continuation of
search for comfort areas
JO 
-£
Level 1
Strong expert roles; reli-
ance on recent supervise
as models; high anxiety;
preference for a structure
feedback format
TO
CD 
08^-
CD CD § 00"
±± Z 5 0)
0 0 ^ 05
CO
'OT= . ."0 
, co
o > .$" co 
.2? ^
O 
•£ >, ^ -~* CO
•>.*- 
CD — CD -^ to
^ (E !2 ffi ~S OF
^l|sl||i
D) Q °- TO CO | -k" W
^5"o^S^-j= OCD
w r r B . e c o o S c
-D 
C
CD 
£
CO 
§ M_
Stage 3
Role Consolidation: incr
confidence; more realist
appraisals of skills; mon
pletely developed sense
identity; transference an
countertransference are
identified
Stage 2
Recovery and Transition: first
steps are taken towards super-
visory identity formation;
strengths are recognized; con-
fidence increases; identity be-
gins to form; a more realistic
appraisal of self is developed
•x 
«p .• , 
o
Stage 1
Role Shock: experience (
"imposter phenomenon";
awareness of weaknesse
lack of identity as superv
sor; feeling of being over
whelmed; sensitivity to
feedback; may withdraw
"attack" supervisees
o.-g
Iglaoj
5™ 38 i
£ c
Q.'
•<- w 3 "CD
° O C0"0
c •£-£ R
o~ o E
*lfll
&§I«1
« o i o 2
cno ^ '-a to
If
±= (O
Stage III
Incorporation: Learning
supervision is a relation:
Stage II
Conceptualization: A personal
search for concepts
_
Stage 1
Unconscious identificatiol
with or unconscious
emulation of one's formei
supervisor
CD
CO
CO
C £—•
CD n~
"O O5
o ^
co
CD
«.>,
CD c
Q-o
- 0-c
— ® %
<1> 
£0.
TO.E 
Q)
<?, 2 "a
COH.E
o 
.-•§!
2 $ r?W
!=; c S° £
Stage III
Responsibility for structi
supervision shifts to trail
self-evaluation is encoui
supervisor acts as a cor
Stage II
Supervisor takes responsibility
for structuring and managing
the supervision sessions; roles
are teacher and counselor
c
-9 cLQ
Stage 1
Establishment and definit
of supervisory relationshi
supervisory role is used 1
facilitate goal setting
a>
Q) 
m
0)c8^
£-S §
e o o
_ICQ_J
14
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

and to develop a normative sense of trainee development and predictability
in some supervisory patterns. As the supervisor continues to consolidate his
or her experience and identity, a greater sense of security is manifested in
the supervisor's openness and eagerness to learn and receive input from
supervisees and his or her increased empathy, enthusiasm, and synthesis of
all aspects of theory, science-based practice, values, and experience. We
believe that there is no final phase of supervisor development: Even the
most senior supervisor, in performing as a mentor and leader, is fostering
the innovation and development of others and is continuing to evolve and
develop him- or herself.
Developmental models that focus on multicultural counseling compe-
tence and multicultural supervision (Carney & Kahn, 1984; D'Andrea &
Daniels, 1997; Leong & Wagner, 1994), racial consciousness identity (as
described in chap. 6, this volume; Helms, 1990; Sabnani, Ponterotto, &
Borodovsky, 1991) and specific clinical skills such as psychodiagnostics
(Finkelstein & Tuckman, 1997) have also been proposed. These models
reflect the importance of tailoring training to insure diversity competence.
Developmental approaches potentially contribute to the establishment
of congruence in expectations and roles in supervision and encourage super-
visory behavior appropriate to the needs of the supervisee. Although devel-
opmental approaches are heuristically appealing and convey "experiential
validity" (Sansbury, 1982), empirical support for them has not been obtained.
The research literature, when reviewed as a whole (Ellis & Ladany, 1997;
Stoltenberg, McNeill, & Crethar, 1994; Watkins, 1995b), identifies only a
small proportion of the studies completed that met criteria for methodologi-
cal inclusion. The shortcomings, including very small sample size, redundant
supervisor ratings, total reliance on self-reports, statistical irregularities, and
insufficient research models (Ellis &. Ladany, 1997; Ellis, Ladany, Krengel,
& Schult, 1996), have led to a veritable methodological morass. Ellis and
Ladany (1997) reported that "the overall quality of research during the
past 15 years was substandard" (p. 492) and concluded that developmental
"theories and the central premises of these remain untested" (p. 493). They
suggested that the process of supervision is more complex than connoted
in the current models and that perhaps other aspects of trainee experience
or personality have a similar or greater impact than that of supervision.
In addition to the failure to conclusively establish empirical support,
a number of practical considerations limit the utility of developmental
approaches in the clinical setting. Homogeneity is not present within or
across training levels, and often disciplines are combined without consider-
ation to differences in orientation to training, experience, and supervision
(e.g., clinical psychology and counseling psychology students and interns
at all levels of training, psychiatric residents, social work trainees, and
marriage and family trainees). Further, aspects important to clinical practice,
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
15

such as integration of empirical research in treatment planning; the use
of metaphor, process, nonverbal communication, and the development of
assessment strategies; and the use of culture or diversity as a framework
for conceptualization (M. T. Brown & Landrum-Brown, 1995; Wisnia &
Falender, 1999), are typically not included as factors in developmental
models. Subtle, yet salient, aspects of the supervision process, such as re-
sponses to accurate self-report, distortions, and client-therapist demands,
are not reflected directly in existing developmental models.
Research suggests, however, that certain supervisor behaviors appear
to be related to the developmental level. Stone (1980) found that more
experienced supervisors generated more planning statements concerning the
supervisee, which is consistent with Watkins' (1995b) view that supervisor
planning and conceptual behavior may vary as a function of supervisee
developmental level. Marikis, Russell, and Dell (1985) found experienced
supervisors to be more verbal, more self-disclosing, and to provide more
direct instruction in counseling skills. E. L. Worthington (1984a) found
only one significant difference between pre- and post-PhD supervisors: Expe-
rienced supervisors used humor more frequently in the supervision process.
However, in a later study he found that more experienced supervisors were
also less likely to project negative personal attributes onto supervisees who
were experiencing difficulty and were more likely to attribute the problems
to situational variables that can be affected (E. L. Worthington, 1984b). It
is valuable to examine the finding that, in contrast to the more simplistic,
idiosyncratic conceptualizations generated by novices, experienced counsel-
ors produced parsimonious, highly complex, domain-specific schemas (May-
field, Kardash, & Kivlighan, 1999). Novices attended to superficial detail,
whereas experienced clinicians observed abstract and therapeutically rele-
vant dimensions (Kivlighan & Quigley, 1991). McCarthy et al. (1994) found
few differences by years of experience or degree, and Rodolfa at al. (1998)
found no significant difference in supervisory styles and practices, based on
time of licensure. According to Ellis and Dell (1986), the act of supervising
does not increase proficiency in supervision; improvement occurs through
specific training and perhaps increased cognitive complexity. However, these
observations are drawn from just a few studies, and have rarely been repli-
cated; when they have been replicated, it has often been with methodological
shortcomings.
Perhaps the most salient finding is that almost no theory or empirical
investigation has addressed the impact of supervision on the development
of the trainee and consequently on client outcome or satisfaction (Holloway
&. Neufeldt, 1995), although the implicit assumption is that there is a strong
positive relationship. Watkins (1995b) reiterated E. L. Worthington's (1987)
summary of the missing link of clinical efficacy: "There is still virtually
no attention given to client change, sophisticated influence strategies, or
16 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

theoretical match-mismatch problems" (Watkins, 1995b, p. 668). However,
Goodyear and Guzzardo (2000) countered this conclusion, suggesting that
the positive relationship between supervision and client outcomes can be
inferred by combining the knowledge that specific supervision processes
affect trainee-client working alliances (Patton & Kivlighan, 1997) and
that working alliances between clients and therapists are associated with
therapeutic outcomes (Horvath & Symonds, 1991). Although they need
refinement to better address the complexities in supervision, these ap-
proaches hold the potential to articulate both the general and idiosyncratic
impacts of professional development on therapy outcome.
Process-Based Approaches
Process-based approaches, sometimes referred to as social role supervi-
sion models (J. M. Bernard & Goodyear, 1998), were developed to provide
descriptions of the component roles, tasks, and processes within supervision
and as a means to uniformly classify events occurring in supervision. These
approaches aim to provide reliable and valid procedures for studying the
supervision process and for assessing outcomes, particularly as related to the
congruence between trainee and supervisor tasks and expectations. Other
process models, such as an ecological—behavioral model (Kratochwill,
Lepage, & McGivern, 1997), microcounseling (Daniels, Rigazio-Digilio, &
Ivey, 1997), and the experiential learning model (Milne & James, 2002),
offer specific training procedures to enhance competence. Although a com-
prehensive review of these models is not attempted here, approaches devel-
oped by J. M. Bernard (1997) and Holloway (1995, 1997) are presented to
illustrate their contributions to our understanding of the supervision process.
The Discrimination Model
J. M. Bernard (1997, p. 310) developed the discrimination model to
provide "the simplest of maps" to supervisors-in-training so that they could
conceptualize their interventions. Three focus areas were identified: process
(or intervention skills), which includes all behaviors that distinguish coun-
seling as a purposeful therapeutic interpersonal activity; conceptualization
skills, which includes the trainee's ability to make some sense of the informa-
tion that the client is presenting and to consider a response; and personaliza*
tion skills, which includes all of the features of the trainee as an individual
that contribute to the therapeutic process, such as personality and culture
(cf. Bernard, 1997, pp. 310-311). Lanning (1986) proposed a fourth category,
professional behavior, although Bernard (1997, p. 311) responded that this
dimension can be subsumed into the original model. The second part of
the discrimination model presents three general roles that the supervisor
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
17

might assume in responding to the trainee: the teacher role (the supervisor
takes on the responsibility for determining what is required for the trainee
to become more competent), the counselor role (the supervisor facilitates
exploration in addressing the interpersonal or intrapersonal reality of the
trainee), and the consultant role (the supervisee serves as a resource, "but
encourages the trainee to trust his or her own thoughts, insights, and feelings
about the work with the client" [J. M. Bernard, 1997, p. 312]). This model
is explicitly designed to address the training aspects of supervision (J. M.
Bernard & Goodyear, 1998, p. 30) and provides a means to identify preferred
supervisory roles and to evaluate the degree of congruence between the
supervisee's needs and the supervisor's responses. An instance of incongru-
ence would be found, for example, when a trainee needs help in case
conceptualization and the supervisor assumes the teacher role and provides
a diagnosis rather than facilitating a process of conceptualization. Empirical
research has not established the adequacy of the model; however, its simplic-
ity and straightforward approach provide a useful tool by which supervisor
roles may be conceptualized in relation to supervisee needs (Ellis & Ladany,
1997, P. 467).
Systems Approach to Supervision
Holloway (1995) applied "the principles of a systems approach that
emphasize a learning alliance between the supervisor and supervisee based
on the multiple interlinking factors in the relationship of supervision" (p. 6).
She identified seven interrelated factors that contribute to the process and
outcome of supervision. The core factor in the supervisory process is the
supervision relationship, which involves "the interpersonal structure, i.e.,
dimensions of power and involvement, phases of the relationship, i.e., rela-
tional development specific to the participants, and the supervisory contract,
i.e., the establishment of a set of expectations for tasks and functions of
supervision" (p. 42). All of the other factors—that is, the client, supervisor,
trainee, institution, and the functions and tasks of supervision—interact
dynamically and influence the supervision relationship. Through the Systems
Approach to Supervision (SAS) analysis of supervision session transcripts
and through the use of recall interviews, Holloway demonstrated how each
factor influences the others and provided additional support for the view
of supervision as a "shared interactional phenomenon" (p. 117). Emphasis
is placed on the mutuality of the interaction and the importance of the
participants' shared meaning of a supervision interaction (p. 118). Similar
to the discrimination model, the SAS approach provides a means to closely
evaluate the interactions that influence the supervision relationship and
its effectiveness in building competence. In contrast with developmental
approaches, which assume levels of competence, the SAS approach focuses
18 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

on the unique needs of the supervisee as negotiated within the relationship
between supervisor and supervisee.
The Usefulness of Process-Based Models
These process-based models provide conceptual tools for understanding
the interrelated forces that contribute to the process of supervision and, to
the extent that they are successful in identifying discrete components, furnish
models on which empirical research can be conducted. Psychotherapy-based
and process-based models articulate the processes by which supervision aims
to accomplish the development of clinical competence. The interpersonal
and contextual complexity observed in the supervisory process further sup-
ports the claim that supervision involves a unique praxis and therefore
requires competencies that are not automatically developed through experi-
ence as a clinician, professor, or researcher.
Present Status of Supervision Practice
Supervision is now recognized as a distinct clinical practice. Although
the requirement of supervised experience was established early in the training
guidelines (APA Committee on Training in Clinical Psychology, 1947,
1965a, 1965b; Hoch, Ross, & Winder, 1966; Lloyd & Newbrough, 1966;
Raimy, 1950), it was not until the 1990s that supervision was formally
identified as a competency (Association for Counselor Education and Super-
vision, 1995; APA Committee on Accreditation, 2002; Dye & Borders,
1990; Holloway, 1995, pp. 104-106; Peterson et al., 1997), and it has only
been within the past 20 years that a substantive literature began to emerge.
For example, only 32 citations prior to 1980 were found by using "supervi-
sion" as the keyword in a literature search of PsycINFO (APA, 2002c), as
opposed to 1,279 citations for literature in the most recent decade.
Despite the many advances in supervision theory, research, and practice
(J. M. Bernard & Goodyear, 1998; Hess, 1987b; Holloway, 1995; Watkins,
1997b); the acknowledgment of supervision as a distinct competency; and
the increased awareness of issues involving professional responsibility and
liability (APA, 2002e; ASPPB, Task Force on Supervision Guidelines, 1998;
Saccuzzo, 2002), supervision often appears to be practiced today with what
seems to be insufficient education and training. Although clinical supervision
is one of the professional activities often performed by psychologists (e.g.,
38.3% of full-time academic faculty who were members of APA Division
12 [Tyler, Sloan, & King, 2000] and 48% of the members of APA Division
29 [Norcross, Hedges, & Castle, 2002] regularly provide supervision), most
psychologists have not received formal training and supervision in supervi-
sion (Scott, Ingram, Vitanza, & Smith, 2000). Consistent with these find-
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
19

ings, Rodolfa et al. (1998) reported that their sample of supervisors had
received minimal supervisory training in their doctoral programs (42%) and
in internship (25%) settings. Following its review of the field, the ASPPB
Task Force on Supervision Guidelines (1998) concluded the following:
Given the critical role of supervision in the protection of the public
and in the training and practice of psychologists, it is surprising that
organized psychology has failed to establish graduate level training in
supervision or'training standards for supervisors (e.g., qualifications,
content of supervision, evaluation). Few supervisors have had formal
courses on supervision, and most rely on their own experience as a
supervisee. In addition, the complexity of the supervisory process as well
as the reality that supervision itself serves multiple purposes prevents
simplistic guidelines, (pp. 1-2)
A paradox appears to exist: The increased recognition of the salience
of supervision in professional practice has not been accompanied by a
concerted effort to train or support supervisors (cf. Milne & James, 2002,
p. 56). Clearly, more opportunities, if not mandated requirements, for educa-
tion and supervised training appear to be necessary to ensure competence
in the practice of clinical supervision. This objective is imperative to safe-
guard the welfare of clients and ensure the quality of the clinical services
they receive, and, simultaneously, to respond to the training requirements
of the next generation of clinicians. We suggest that a competency-based
approach to supervision provides a viable model to accomplish this charge
and to advance efficacy established through sound scientific investigation.
A COMPETENCY-BASED APPROACH TO
CLINICAL SUPERVISION
All .approaches to supervision are intended to develop competence.
A competency-based approach, however provides an explicit framework and
method to 'initiate, develop, implement, and evaluate the processes and
outcomes -of supervision. Such an approach, consistent with innovations
in competency-based education, places emphasis on the ability to apply
knowledge and skills in the real world and uses performance outcomes as
criteria for evaluating both learners and training programs (U.S. Department
of Education, National Center for Education Statistics, 2002; Urch, 1975;
R. A. Voorhees, ,2'OOlb). This focus is in step with the increased emphasis
on explicit procedures of accountability in health care, including evidence-
based protocols, and complements training initiatives in problem-based
assessment recently undertaken by the Accreditation Council for Graduate
Medical Education (Accreditation Council for Graduate Medical Education,
2000) and the American Board of Medical Specialties (cited in Leach, 2002).
20 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Competency-based training programs in psychology have been devel-
oped; however, they do not appear to have been widely adopted or sufficiently
evaluated. Fantuzzo (1984) developed the MASTERY method, and Fantuzzo
and Moon (1984); Fantuzzo, Sisemore, and Spradlin (1983); Sumerall, Lopez,
and Oehlert (2000); Kratochwill and Bergan (1978); Kratochwill, Van
Someren, and Sheridan (1989); and Stratford (1994) developed competency-
based training protocols for psychological assessment, interview skills, and
generalist clinical psychology training. For some clinical supervisors, a
competency-based approach to supervision might at first glance appear
to be nothing new, as clinical training has always been about the development
of competencies; however, the explicit use of processes derived from
competency-based models may be instructive and, for many training programs,
will be novel. In the following sections, we present the theory and procedures
for developing a competency-based approach to supervision and describe the
superordinate values we believe should inform the supervision process.
Procedures in Competency-Based Supervision
The conceptual learning model provides the foundation of our
competency-based approach. Figure 1.1 illustrates the interrelationships
SUMMATIVE ASSESSMENT
OF PERFORMANCE
ACQUIRED SKILLS,
ABILITIES AND
KNOWLEDGE
ASSESSMENT
DEVELOPED INTHE
LEARNING PROCESS
SKILLS A BILITIES AND KNOWLEDGE
TRAITS AND CHARACTERISTICS
FOUNDATION
Figure 1.1. A conceptual learning model. U.S. Department of Education, 2002,
adapted. In the public domain.
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION
21

between three domains in the developmental trajectory in which knowledge,
skills, and values are developed, assembled into competencies, and then
assessed through demonstrations. The first rung of the ladder depicts the
personal traits, values, and interpersonal competencies upon which the
foundation of clinical expertise is developed. Next, graduate education
(including other life experiences; e.g., employment, volunteer service, etc.)
contributes to the acquisition of knowledge, skills, and values that inaugurate
socialization to the profession. Clinical training then provides the integrative
learning experiences in which skills, abilities, knowledge, and values1 interact
to form learning bundles and, with practice under supervision, become
clinical competencies (cf. R. A. Voorhees, ZOOla, p. 9). Evaluation includes
both formative feedback and summative assessments. Formative evaluations
are collaborative and continuous during the integrative learning phase and
reinforce the value of consistent self-assessment and external feedback.
When the supervisor and supervisee concur that the competency has been
sufficiently developed, a formal summative performance evaluation may be
obtained. Competencies are formally evaluated on the basis of readiness
rather than on a predetermined schedule; collaboration and self-assessment
are emphasized throughout the training phase. Competency, as previously
discussed, is defined as sufficiency relative to an external standard, and it
is assumed that competence can always be enhanced. In clinical training,
clear external standards are set, which assist the supervisor and supervisee
in developing appropriate learning activities, performance objectives, and
processes of assessment.
Establishing Supervision Goals and Objectives
The use of an explicit competency-based approach prepares the supervi-
sor and the supervisee to be deliberate about the learning goals and objectives
and to establish the processes by which these goals and objectives may be
achieved. Central to the task is identification of the knowledge, skills, and
values that will be bundled and integrated as part of the path toward
competence. The first step in implementing a competency-based approach
is the identification of the competencies or the input that will be the
focus of the training experience. The selection process is not conducted in
isolation; the faculty considers the clinical service requirements of the setting
and reviews the literature in the field to ensure that the competencies
are relevant to contemporary clinical practice. As per the philosophy of
competency-based education, the competencies should directly relate to
real-world job requirements. Once selected, the requisite knowledge, skills,
'We have added the term "values" to the model originally developed by R. S. Voorhees (R. S.
Voorhees, 2001a) in light of the values-based nature of psychological practice.
22 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

and values that are assembled to form the competency are identified and
become the initial focus of supervision. For example, in an intake interview,
listening skills, knowledge of diagnostic systems, risk assessment, diversity
awareness, and interpersonal skills are required, among other skills, and
command the focus of attention. The identification of the constituents of
a competency, through disassembly of the competency into definable and
potentially measurable units (cf. Bers, 2001, p. 29), helps the supervisee and
supervisor to attend to specific performance requirements. For example, a
number of skills are required to conduct an intake interview effectively;
some supervisees excel at establishing initial rapport, whereas others demon-
strate good use of diagnostic-focused questioning, and so forth. By breaking
down a competency into components, precise feedback and learning strate-
gies can be used to reinforce areas of strength and develop skills or to impart
knowledge that is lacking. Observable behaviors as well as self-assessment
and self-report procedures are developed to encourage formative evaluation.
Although training objectives are identified for the rotation or program
as a whole, we recommend individual assessment and collaborative goal
setting in supervision. By design, competency-based approaches emphasize
the development of individual competencies rather than assigning goals to
trainees on the basis of assumed developmental levels. This emphasis is
in keeping with our experience that significant variance exists between
competencies attained by an individual trainee as well as between members of
a particular training class. Skill acquisition is not, in our view, a homogenous
process, but rather is usually heterogeneous and discontinuous. Competency-
based procedures target individual competencies, allowing supervisors to
tailor training to individual needs. The training objectives, learning pro-
cesses, and modes of assessment are among the aspects included in the
development of a formal supervision contract (see chap. 3, this volume).
Congruence between supervision and training goals builds the supervisory
relationship and establishes a clear focus for inquiry and for learning processes
to be initiated.
Case Management and the Learning Process in Supervision
Following the identification of competencies and setting of goals and
expectations, supervisees begin providing clinical services, drawing on their
prior education, clinical training, and on-site instruction (including didactic
presentations, demonstrations, live observation, and practice exercises). The
supervision of the supervisee's clinical work begins as well and is aimed at
ensuring client care and fostering learning. The supervisor assists the super-
visee to become observant and to reflect on the therapeutic interaction, his
or her contributions to it, and his or her subjective experience of the session.
This step progresses to collaborative inquiry, in which the supervisor and
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
23

supervisee describe their observations and discuss what occurred, including
the nature of the interaction, the theory or literature that informed the
therapist's perspective, and alternative approaches. Effective supervision
facilitates a nondefensive inquiry into the clinical process and encourages
self-reflective assessment not only through judicious questioning, but also
primarily through modeling inquiry as a process of exploration through which
insight can be gained rather than as an exercise in criticism. Throughout this
process, supervisors must be mindful of their oversight responsibilities to
ensure quality care. Supervisors determine the sufficiency of the supervisee's
abilities with respect to the needs of the client. Some supervisors may find
that they can rely on the trainee to facilitate an effective therapeutic process,
whereas others may need to be more highly directive to ensure appropriate
management of the case.
Central to a competency-based approach is the identification of learn-
ing processes that lead to the development of measurable competencies.
Drawing on Kolb's (1984) model of experiential learning, Milne and James
(2002) developed a clinical supervision approach that, in our opinion,
complements our competency-based approach. In their model, the acquisi-
tion of skills and understanding is accomplished "through a combination
of four modes of reflection, conceptualization, planning and practical experi-
ence, within a structured learning environment" (Milne & James, 2002,
p. 57). Learners act and reflect, becoming more aware of their actions and
of the knowledge base or conceptualizations that might guide them, and
thereby grasp the implications of their actions, which in turn inform future
actions through planning. The object is for the supervisee to actively partici-
pate in a learning cycle that includes experiencing, reflecting, conceptualiz-
ing, planning, and experimenting. This cycle is located at the core of a
circumplex of clinical training and supervision experiences and reflects the
constituents of experiential learning (see Figure 1.2). The supervisor assists
the learner "to go round the experiential learning cycle" (p. 57) by using
an array of educational methods, such as didactic teaching, role-playing,
and modeling. The supervisor encourages the learner to engage in behaviors
through the balanced use of interventions (see Table 1.2).
The learning cycle begins with the supervisee's experience of providing
the clinical service and is assisted in the supervisee's reflecting on the
experience, which leads to an understanding of what happened in the
clinical session and planning for what needs to happen in the next session.
Experimentation then follows as the supervisee performs new behaviors or
applies new understanding within the subsequent session. The entire cycle
may be completed in one supervision session, but is usually accomplished
over time; the phases of experiencing, reflecting, and conceptualizing may
be repeated before planning and experimenting are implemented. Through
an iterative process, the cycle promotes learning as specific skills, knowledge,
24 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Contextual backdrop
(physical environment; social milieu, etc.)
Figure 1.2. Experiential learning model of effective supervision. From "The Observed
Impact of Training on Competence in Clinical Supervision," by D. L. Milne and I. A.
James, 2002, British Journal of Clinical Psychology, 41, pp. 55-72. Copyright 2002
by the British Psychological Society. Reprinted with permission.
and values are identified in respect to the clinical task and gradually assem-
bled to form competencies.
This model also provides a means for the supervisor's competence in
facilitating the cycle to be assessed, through evaluation of the extent to
which the interventions are balanced and the degree to which the learner
engages in experiential learning through the use of the Teacher's PETS, a
procedure to code behaviors (Milne, James, Keegan, & Dudley, 2002). For
example, a supervisor who used only interventions of listening and supporting
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION
25

^^
TABLE 1 .2
rner Behaviors Coded by the Process Evaluation of Teaching and Supervision (PETS
Observable Instrument
co
•o
CO
o
.55
CD
Q_
3
CO
Behavior
1
m0.
3
C/5
C 
</> 
_ 
-, 
-n — 
<v
O 
— 
® 
^ 
(0 
> 
— Q) 
^j (/) 
"t^
O) 
C 
^ 
^3 - 
O 
^ CO 
~n "~" 
~
Q) 
r~ 
— 
CO 
r^ -i--*" 
-i— 
Q 
;~ ~ 
0j 
Qj
O 
c 
= 
= . 
*aJ 
- 
> o 
-Q, 
i;^:ScD
E 
5 •_- 
• * « E d, to >• s; 1 
O>B a> |
<n 
~ 
^ 
£ 
CB '= 
QJ -"=2 
co-g y = . £ c °
Organizing and managing the flow of the session — e.g., "1 would like to cover X today," "Le
now," and "Anything you would like to talk about today?"
Engaging in active listening and observing, silently paying attention, and understanding tha
neither verbal nor nonverbal feedback
Using verbal and nonverbal nonspecific reassurance, agreeing, encouraging (e.g., "That's i
"Good," and "Well done"), nodding, smiling, laughing, and expressing empathy, warmth, an
genuineness
Summarizing information to clarify links and understanding (e.g., "Let me see if 1 got that ri
"So what you've done was. . .")
Providing specific verbal or written feedback, positive or negative, that is intended to weak<
strengthen aspects of the learner's behavior, thoughts, or feelings (e.g., "The way you set 1
was very good," "You let him go on a tangent there," "That was an excellent behavioral ex|
and "You could have strengthened this with an experiment")
Asking for information and facts, not testing knowledge, and defining the trainee's problem
old is she?," "Was that his first episode?," and "What did you do then?")
Explicitly monitoring, checking, or evaluating competence and asking for an opinion (e.g., "
you do here?", "What does Beck suggest about. . .?", and "What kind of homework task we
here?")
Getting the learner to rethink or reason his or her view — similar to checking the knowledge
causes the learner to rethink his or her current perspective (e.g., "How else could you haw
and "What would have been a better way to. . .?")
Providing abstract (not personal) data to the learner, transmitting information (e.g., facts ar
theories, formulations, ideas, and methods), using a didactic approach (e.g., traditional teai
issuing a directive that indicates what the learner should do to achieve goals, and using a <
emphasis (e.g., "Generally, what you do here is. . .," "There have been trials to treat panic
session," and "The way to approach this situation is. . .")
_ 
O)
c 
c:
••S 
8 
'lo
CO 
-= 
o
.* 
E 
CD CD 
^
g 1 I j! 
^
O) 
'jq 
Q 
"'""' CD 
c
c 
o 
•— 
'
c
a
> 
c 
?-§* 
"5> 
?
Ill 1 1 i if i I
^ 
L J 
C O 
C O O 
( D O - * : O 
—
T— 
C\J 
CO 
^ " L O 
C D f ^ 
CO 
O>
26
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Cities in which one learner actively develops competence (e.g., modeling
rmance, using role-play exercises, implementing learning tasks, and
)
^
t5
CO
CD
CO
.CD
"to
O
"o
CO
Q.
CO
C
^
0)_l
—
_TO
(—
CD
CD
Q.
X
CD
O)
73
'^
O
CD
ting correct perfoi
lavioral exercises
£
tn
r demons
o
CD
0
CD
C
"55
"£o
CD
C
C
to
JD
CD
.a
05
'E
CO
8
CO
CD
(~
O
73
C
CO
3s
CO
Q.
al something new about self, such as experience, limitations, and goals
se cases difficult to handle," "1 would like to improve myself in. . .," and "1
CD CD ^
> -C " .
CD *- 
.
"~ 73 .
O C O
^i
CO CO jtj
3 « >,
coi§r
C CO >
t 
CD .t±
» >-o
£ "I
CB~^
73 
r <D
03 
CD"
CD ai £*
_i -2- E
en
c
'coo
fj
co
73
"55
c/>
^
reel negative reaction that is nonspecific to the learner's opinion or grasp
making verbal corrections)
•° o
CO-D
-2 to
% fflif
0 «
« m
J3 
r
CD P5
> CD
?al|
m "o
en
c
CD
CD
CO
COtob
cvi
session, generally a case example from trainees
>,
Q.
CO
CD
.C
CO
"o
O
CD
73
'>
CO
CO
C
!co«
••>?•
0
•*=
e
CD
CO
JD
Q
0
CD
73
">
CD
C
'to
ri
ing on a suitable category from the aforementioned; nonobservable
-task behavior (e.g., social chat, jokes, paperwork, and setting up
73
'o
CD
73
,C
&
3
0it
73
CO
C
her behaviors; off
0
xperienc
ehaviors:
LLJ
CD
5
•*
J3
^^
quipmen
CD
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION
27

would be poorly evaluated, particularly if these behaviors did not prompt
the learner to fully participate in each of the experiential learning activities.
This model provides a means to assess the efficacy of a training protocol in
experiential learning that classifies supervisor competence into measurable
behaviors. Other methods or models can be used in advancing a competency-
based approach to supervision as well. The important elements concern the
precise identification of competencies and procedures to enhance their
development.
Formative and Summative Evaluations
Evaluation is an important responsibility in supervision and supports
case management, quality client care, and the learning process. Formative
evaluations are continuous and use both formal and informal procedures,
including ongoing inquiry and critique focusing on the supervisee's effective-
ness in performing clinical services. Instruments and observation procedures
may be used to provide reliable, valid, and useful feedback to supervisees.
Formative evaluations also include consideration of the supervisee's ability
to reflect on the therapeutic process, his or her contributions to it, and his
or her level of competence. Summative evaluation constitutes a more formal
process, ensuring the supervisor's accountability to the supervisee, the aca-
demic and clinical training programs, and the profession and ultimately
safeguarding the public. Summative evaluations typically involve ratings of
performance that are culled over time and represent the supervisee's suffi-
ciency in a given competency and describe the extent to which the training
objectives were met. Such evaluations are usually conducted at the midpoint
and at the end of the rotation, serve as the formal evaluation, and become
part of the training record. Because a competency-based approach emphasizes
clear objectives throughout the training process and identifies the requisite
knowledge, skills, and values that are assembled in particular competencies,
a high correspondence can be obtained between training goals, training
activities, and assessment procedures.
In addition, we suggest that evaluation be enhanced by providing
comprehensive feedback that includes descriptions of the supervisee's
strengths as well as shortcomings. Professional development builds on a
foundation of personal strengths and values. Although clinical training is
explicitly not intended nor is suited to evince development at that level,
professional training and practice are certainly influenced by the signature
strengths and values a trainee possesses. Seligman (2002) recently identified
24 strengths, many of which may have particular relevance to the applied
practice of psychology and to clinical training. For example, curiosity, love of
learning, open-mindedness, perseverance, honesty, and fairness are strengths
that we believe to influence the process of clinical education and the develop-
28 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

ment of competence. We suggest that, when providing feedback and assisting
trainees to reflect on their contributions to the clinical process, one pays
attention to the strengths and values that the trainees bring to the clinical
and training setting.
In our view, equally essential to evaluations performed by the
supervisor is the development of self-assessment capacities in the super-
visee. Reflective self-assessment complements the scientific attitude of
evaluating all of the factors that influence the clinical process. Schon
(1983, 1987, 1995; see also Bevan, 1991) described clinicians' cultivation
of the ability for "reflection-in-action," in which multiple, spontaneously
available sources of information, including personal sources, contribute
to an understanding of the therapeutic process and the clinicians' contribu-
tions to it. We encourage reflexivity whereby supervisees consider how
they have obtained their knowledge. Such exploration leads to the
development of metacognition, in which awareness is gained into the
processes by which understanding is constructed, both in session and in
supervision. This awareness allows for a critical examination of biases
and tendencies in approach, which may occlude other sources of knowledge
or practices. In addition, reflection should be directed to the values and
the personal strengths that the supervisee brings to the process as well
as to the personal meanings that clinical experiences are engendering.
Hoshmand (1994) suggested the following:
Reflection can be facilitated in supervision by allowing the supervisee
to think aloud and pose his or her own questions. For example, in
reviewing a taped session of therapeutic practice, the supervisee can be
encouraged to identify critical choice points when decisions on action
alternatives were in question. By reflecting on one's own rationale for
the chosen action, evaluating its fit with the needs of the context and
its impact on the interaction, and considering possible alternatives
with the benefit of hindsight, one can use the process to build a reper-
toire of contextualized thought and action sequences. Reflective self-
questioning can also help us to critique implicit assumptions and identify
reasoning biases in practice (Arnoult & Anderson, 1988) .... In a
reflexive orientation to knowledge, reflection serves as a form of self-
observation and self-monitoring. It is an important part of a personalized
approach to knowledge that includes the self in understanding
(Hamacek, 1985). Thus, the development of reflective habits of mind
goes hand in hand with holistic teaching and learning that focus on
the total person (p. 182; see also Hoshman & Polkinghorne, 1992;
Neufeldt, Karno, & Nelson, 1996).
Through practice of this method of inquiry, supervisees become
more aware of their contributions to the therapeutic process, encouraging
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
29

reflection-in-action and facilitating self-monitoring and disciplined and
thoughtful practice.
Through the application of a competency-based approach, supervis-
ors and supervisees identify training goals and objectives that encourage
the development of specific competencies, including the capacity for self-
assessment and reflection. They collaboratively work to reflect, understand,
plan, and experiment through experiences within the clinical and supervi-
sory settings. The supervisor uses a number of skills that facilitate learning
processes and ensure the welfare of the client.
Superordinate Values in the Applied Practice of Psychology
Of the many influences that inform supervision, we have selected four
superordinate values—integrity-in-relationship, ethical values-based prac-
tice, appreciation of diversity, and science-informed practice—that we be-
lieve to be integral to clinical competence and to psychology as a human
science. We suggest that these values influence every aspect of the supervisory
process and as such require faithful attention.
Integrity'iri'Relationship
The importance of the counselor-client relationship to the therapeutic
process and to its outcome is unquestionable, and the supervisor-supervisee
relationship is likely just as crucial (J. M. Bernard & Goodyear, 1998; Bordin,
1983; Ellis & Ladany, 1997; Holloway, 1995; Ladany, 2002; see chap. 2,
this volume). It is only in the setting of a strong working alliance that
the inevitable personal and professional challenges associated with clinical
training will be disclosed and supportively addressed. Therefore, we place
particular emphasis on the responsibility to advance and to maintain the
integrity of the relationship.
Integrity refers to a state of completeness as well as moral incorrupt-
ibility. The association between these elemental meanings can be illus-
trated in the supervisory relationship. Any corruption in the relationship—
for example, by boundary violations or inattention to professional
responsibilities—compromises the integrity of the relationship and results
in supervision that is lacking. Similarly, if the supervisor and the supervisee
do not actively commit to the complete use of supervision (i.e., to
consider all of the factors that contribute to clinical work), then the
process will be corrupted and little may actually be accomplished. Integrity
contributes to the development of a supervisory alliance, which is collabo-
rative, trusting, and supportive, through which the responsibilities to the
client and to the supervisee will be fulfilled.
30 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Ethical Values-Based Practice
Rather than being a values-free, "objective" science, psychology is very
much a human enterprise in which faith commitments and values shape
methods of inquiry and clinical practice. The aspiration that psychologists
will perform lives of service "to improve the condition of individuals, organi-
zations, and society" (APA, 2002a, Preamble) is consistent with the values
of psychology as a profession (Sinclair, Simon, & Pettifor, 1996) and reflects
organized psychology's long-standing commitment to human welfare, both in
its contributions to knowledge and in direct service to persons (APA, 2002a).
Supervisors play an important role in modeling professional values,
principles, and ethics, and supervision provides a setting in which awareness
of the values informing one's commitment to the profession is to be encour-
aged. Further, such inquiry highlights the values-based nature of psychologi-
cal practice—for example, that the acts of encouraging hope in the face of
despair or challenging a client to further self-responsibility are moral acts
as well as technical interventions.
It is through their experiences in clinical training that students of
psychology will discover—or, rather, construct—the meaning that entering
this profession has for them. The commitment of most trainees to the field
will be strengthened, and they will be grateful to be able to have an opportu-
nity to talk about their values. We are not suggesting that supervisors
go down the slippery slope of providing psychotherapy or counseling in
supervision; rather, we are saying that the exploration of values is relevant
to training in the profession. We are mindful that values influence all human
decision making and that part of the modeling in professional training is
that our own values perspectives, like that of our clients, deserve articulation.
Finally, supervision emphasizes and demonstrates that ethics and compe-
tence are yoked together, as two sides of the same coin: Ethics demands
competence, and competence requires ethical practice. Supervision leads
to the awareness that values are woven into the fabric of knowledge and
that clinical practice in every instance involves the application of ethics.
Appreciation of Diversity
Appreciation of diversity, in all of its forms, is an expression of the
profession's respect for people's rights and dignity (APA 2002a, Principle
E). The American Psychological Association puts this concept in unequivo-
cal terms:
Psychologists respect the dignity and worth of all people, and the rights
of individuals to privacy, confidentiality, and self-determination. Psy-
chologists are aware that special safeguards may be necessary to protect
the rights and welfare of persons or communities whose vulnerabilities
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
31
