impair autonomous decision making. Psychologists are aware of and
respect cultural, individual, and role differences, including those based
on age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national origin,
religion, sexual orientation, disability, language, and socioeconomic
status, and consider these factors when working with members of such
groups. Psychologists try to eliminate the effect on their work of biases
based on those factors, and they do not knowingly participate in or
condone activities of others based upon such prejudices (APA, 2002a,
Principle E).
At first glance, this principle might appear to be readily achievable;
however, as with most principles, it is easier to put into words than it is to
accomplish. The development of an appreciation for diversity is a psychologi-
cally challenging task, if it is taken seriously. The task, in its most radical
sense, involves a deconstruction of the "inescapable framework" of beliefs,
assumptions, and morality that provides the implicit scaffolding of our sense
of reality and identity (C. Taylor, 1989). Deconstruction involves "demysti-
fying a text, tearing it apart to reveal its internal, arbitrary hierarchies and
its presuppositions" (Rosenau, 1992, p. 120). For our purposes, this task
means that we assume an antiobjectivist stance to the assumptions that we
tacitly hold about human nature. We contend that identity is socially
constructed and privileged by the happenstance of the culture into which
one is born and affiliates. When we come upon difference, we recognize
the difference as being inherent to the other party (e.g., "they are different")
rather than appreciate that it is our internal construction of difference.
Gadamer (1962/1976) offers, "In the last analysis all understanding is self
understanding" (emphasis in original; p. 55). With this postmodern sensitiv-
ity, we attempt to appreciate diversity by first recognizing that "all people
are 'multicultural beings,' that all interactions are cross-cultural, and that
all of our life experiences are perceived and shaped from within our own
cultural perspectives" (APA, 2002b).
In the clinical setting, appreciation for diversity is integral in the quest
to understand the experience of the other, to gain insight into the inherent
limitations and cultural biases in our perceptions, to develop awareness and
respect for cultural and individual differences, and to accurately assess the
appropriate use of psychological assessment and intervention procedures. A
major responsibility and challenge in supervision is to actively support
the development of diversity competence and to ensure that culturally
appropriate practices inform applied clinical service (see chap. 6, this vol-
ume; APA, 2000b). Our definition of diversity competency draws on many
of the others provided in the literature. We believe that diversity competency
includes the incorporation of self-awareness by both supervisor and super-
visee and is an interactive process of the parties involved in the clinical
session and in supervision, incorporating all of their diversity factors. It
32 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

entails awareness, knowledge, and appreciation of the interactions among
the client's, supervisee's, and supervisor's assumptions, values, biases, expec-
tations, and worldviews, integrating and practicing appropriate, relevant,
and sensitive assessment and intervention strategies and skills and taking
into account the larger milieu of organization, society, and sociopolitical
variables.
The development of cultural and diversity competency is particularly
timely in light of how the United States is "becoming more racially and
ethnically diverse, increasing the urgency for culturally responsive practices
and services" (APA, 2002b). As the U.S. Surgeon General recommends,
"To be effective, the diagnosis and treatment of mental illness must be
tailored to all characteristics that shape a person's image and identity.
The consequences of not understanding these influences can be profoundly
deleterious" (U.S. Department of Health and Human Services, 1999).
Science-Informed Practice
Whether one conceives of a psychologist as a scientist-practitioner
(Academy of Psychological Clinical Science, 2002; Raimy, 1950), prac-
titioner-scholar (Peterson et al., 1997), clinical scientist (Belar & Perry,
1992), local clinical scientist (Strieker & Trierweiler, 1995), or scientific
practitioner (Peterson, 2000), there is consensus that one of the defining
characteristics of the profession is the integration of science with practice.
The relationship between science and practice is not one of opposition;
rather, "together they equally contribute to excellence in clinical training
in professional psychology" (APA, Committee on Accreditation, 2000e,
p. 3). In our view, science-informed practice constitutes a superordinate
value, and one of the primary goals of supervision is to provide practical
experience in learning how to meaningfully integrate science and practice
in the provision of clinical services. We agree with the following from
Holloway and Wolleat (1994):
because the goal of clinical supervision is to connect science and prac-
tice, supervision is among the most complex of all activities associated
with the practice of psychology. The competent clinical supervisor must
embrace not only the domain of psychological science, but also the
domains of client service and trainee development. The competent
supervisor must not only comprehend how these various knowledge
bases are connected, but also apply them to an individual case (p. 30).
Supervisors, as clinical educators, stand at the forefront of this task.
They teach and demonstrate how knowledge and practices derived from
science are systematically applied in professional consultation. By modeling
the use of such practices in case consultation and supervision, by actively
using the scientific literature (see, e.g., Kanfer, 1990), and by initiating,
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
33

participating or supporting applied research projects within the clinic setting
(Borkovec, Echemendia, Ragusea, & Ruiz, 2001), supervisors affirm the
importance of science-informed practice. More salient, perhaps, they instill
"the questioning attitude of the scientist" (Shakow, 1976, p. 554) whereby
skills in observation, critical thinking, and hypothesis testing are incorpo-
rated into one's understanding of the therapeutic process.
THE STRUCTURE OF THE BOOK
Supervision aims to assist trainees in developing a number of competen-
cies, attitudes, and values that support science-informed practice, safeguard
client welfare, and instill a commitment to professional ethics and service.
In the following chapters, we critically examine the theoretical and empirical
literature and present a competency-based model of clinical supervision. In
advocating for a science-informed approach to supervision and clinical
practice, we base our recommendations on the existing empirical evidence.
We identify inconsistencies in the research literature and point out issues
that require further investigation.
The chapters in this volume are organized around topics we consider
to be foundational to supervision practice: effective practices in supervision,
technical competence, personal factors, the therapeutic and supervisory
alliance, diversity competence, ethical and legal responsibilities and case
management, and evaluation. We conclude with a discussion of the existing
challenges and opportunities that must be addressed to advance the practice
of clinical supervision. Although these topics are divided into separate
chapters for organizational purposes, we believe that, in practice, they are
highly interrelated. For example, ethics cannot be considered without incor-
porating diversity competence, and the therapeutic and supervisory alliance
cannot be understood without paying attention to personal factors.
Throughout the text, we emphasize the interaction between competen-
cies enacted within supervision and within the clinical setting. It is our
view that there is likely a correspondence between the use of a competency
within the supervisory relationship—for example, diversity competence or
attending to strains in the supervisory alliance—and the development and
use of that competency by the trainee in the clinical arena. We present
examples from both supervision and clinical practice to illustrate the impor-
tance of the competency in both settings. We use the terms "trainee" and
"supervisee" interchangeably, as synonymous terms, and consider the princi-
ples espoused in the book to be applicable to the entire range of clinical
training settings, from first-year field placement externships and practica
through internship and postgraduate fellowships.
34 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Although this volume is written primarily for the field of professional
psychology, the competency-based model that is presented could readily be
applied to any of the allied mental health professions, psychiatry, social
work, counseling, and so forth. No intellectual work is constructed in a
vacuum; rather, such work draws on the contributions of others. The work
presented in this volume builds on the existing foundation of scholarship
in the field, enlivened by our own personal experiences as supervisors,
educators, clinicians, and supervisees. As you read further, we suggest that
you stop along the way and consider the literature and our recommendations
in light of your own experiences in supervision. In so doing, you may gain
a deeper appreciation for what was gained and missed in the past and what
can be provided to others in the future.
THE PRACTICE OF CLINICAL SUPERVISION 
35

2
WHAT MAKES FOR
GOOD SUPERVISION?
Research on the "best" and "worst" supervisors is useful in understand-
ing what factors contribute to high-quality supervision and acts as the
framework for defining dimensions of competence in the chapters that
follow. In this chapter, existent research is reviewed to define the particular
constellation of characteristics that distinguish a good therapist from a good
supervisor, to describe a "good" supervisor, and to determine the factors
that contribute to supervisee's perceptions of effective (and ineffective)
clinical supervision. A summary of research on qualities associated with
excellent supervision and with lousy supervision is presented, followed by
a description of the factors involved in provision of high-quality supervision,
including conflict resolution, disclosure, mentoring, culture, gender, and
format. The last section of the chapter details how an understanding of
the qualities of best and worst supervisors contributes to practice and the
development of specific competencies for best supervision. The material
presented in this section is particularly relevant because "about one half
of a professional psychologist's formal training involves learning through
supervision" (Bent, Schindler, & Dobbins, 1991, p. 124).
It has been suggested that the same personal characteristics of the
"ideal psychotherapist" may apply to the "ideal supervisor" (Carifio &
Hess, 1987). These characteristics included empathy, respect, genuineness,
concreteness, and self-disclosure as well as self-knowledge, tolerance, and
37

superior ability (Raimy, 1950). However, McCarthy, DeBell, Kanuha, and
McLeod (1988) viewed the idea of equating the most effective supervisor
with a master counselor as a myth. In addition to the lack of empirical
support for equating the two, McCarthy et al. pointed out that the ideal
supervisor clearly separates supervision from psychotherapy and does not
provide counseling as part of supervision (Carifio & Hess, 1987), thus using
a different skill set with different outcome goals. However, it is important
to note that the best supervisors use therapeutic qualities such as empathy
and genuineness in the process of supervision (Stout, 1987).
Many of the studies of best and worst supervision have been fraught
with the types of methodological flaws prevalent in research on development
of the supervisee (Ellis & Ladany, 1997). Researchers are concerned that
the entire self-report methodology underlying best and worst studies is flawed
in that effective supervision may not be the most satisfying or pleasurable
at the time (Ladany, Ellis, & Friedlander, 1999), and that variables of liking
may influence reporting. Thus, we lack significant empirical data to support
results, and our conclusions must be tentative at best. However, there does
appear to be some consensus on the constituent areas comprising good
supervision described throughout this chapter. These areas are supported
by individual research studies and several reviews in which the categories
were inferred (Henderson, Cawyer, & Watkins, 1999; Neufeldt, Beutler, &
Banchero, 1997; Worthen & McNeil, 1996). Two consensually impor-
tant aspects of supervision are the supportive relationship and the work-
ing alliance.
RESEARCH ON HIGH-QUALITY SUPERVISION
Supportive Relationship
Studies of the best or most effective supervisor have provided us with
a profile of a high-quality supervisory relationship (Henderson, Cawyer, &
Watkins, 1999; Worthen & McNeill, 1996), the establishment of which is
determined to be a central aspect of supervisory competency. This finding is
not surprising in light of Ekstein and Wallerstein's (1958) description of the
art of psychotherapy as transmitted through the relationship with the super-
visor and Ellis and Ladany's (1997) conclusion from their comprehensive
methodological review that "the quality of the supervisory relationship is para-
mount to successful supervision" (p. 495). Many of the characteristics of the
supervisory relationship are parallel to factors previously defined as significant
in the therapeutic alliance (Stein & Lambert, 1995). A high-quality supervi-
sory relationship entails a combination of facilitating attitudes, behaviors, and
practices. Facilitating attitudes and behaviors consist of supervisor empathy
38 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

with and understanding of the difficult struggles and self-analysis through
which the supervisee must go. Facilitation also refers to the creation of a sense
of teamwork between supervisor and supervisee (Henderson, Cawyer, &
Watkins, 1999). Facilitating behaviors include empathy (Carifio & Hess,
1987; Nerdrum & Ronnestad, 2002; Worthen &. McNeil, 1996); warmth and
understanding (Hutt, Scott, & King, 1983; Martin, Goodyear & Newton,
1987); a sense of validation or affirmation (Wulf & Nelson, 2000); accep-
tance (Hutt et al., 1983); approachability and attentiveness (Henderson
et al., 1999); respect for personal integrity, autonomy (Henderson et al., 1999;
Hutt et al., 1983), and strengths (Heppner & Roehlke, 1984); and a nonjudg-
mental stance. Highly valued supervisors are flexible, genuine (Carifio & Hess,
1987; Nelson, 1978), interested, experienced, and currently conducting ther-
apy regularly themselves. They have a sense of humor and use it in their super-
vision (E. L. Worthington, 1984a).
Also valued was competence in facilitating learning (Henderson et al.,
1999), including knowledge and experience relevant to the supervisee, and
an open-minded approach to allow for maximal autonomy of the supervisee.
Specific components include specialized expertise (Allen, Szollos, &. Wil-
liams, 1986; McCarthy et al., 1994); skill (Hutt et al., 1983); theoretical,
technical, and conceptual knowledge (Watkins, 1995b); and significant
skill at analyzing events of therapy (Henderson et al., 1999). Practices that
facilitate learning include encouragement of exploration and experimenta-
tion (Worthen & McNeill, 1996); encouragement of supervisee disclosures
of actions, feelings, attitudes, and conflicts (Hutt et al., 1983; McCarthy
et al., 1994); understanding of personal supervisee characteristics and the
dynamics of the supervisory relationship (Gandolfo & Brown, 1987); and
knowing when to self-disclose to normalize a trainee's experience (Worthen
& McNeill, 1996).
Nelson (1978) concluded that interest in supervision appears to over-
ride experience and knowledge as an essential component. High-quality
supervision has been distinguished by duration of experience (quality is
associated with duration and frequency of contact) and occurring after a
less favorable supervisory experience (Allen et al., 1986).
Evaluation practices have been highly valued as a component of good
supervision. Evaluation refers to a predesignated procedure for providing
regular feedback structured around agreed-on goals. Specific components
include constructive criticism balanced with encouragement, regular feed-
back (Henderson et al., 1999), articulation of shared expectations and mu-
tual goals for the supervision and relationship (Leddick & Dye, 1987), and
constructive confrontation (Gandolfo & Brown, 1987; Henderson et al.,
1999; C. D. Miller & Getting, 1966).
Use of theoretical grounding or working within a cohesive theory
(Allen et al., 1986) and a shared theoretical framework (Kennard, Stewart,
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
39

& Gluck, 1987; Putney, Worthington, & McCullough, 1992) were valued
supervision skills. These skills refer to significant theoretical under-
pinnings—and agreement on these factors—as a basis for supervision. Con-
gruent theories or supervisors and supervisees who shared a theoretical
orientation were associated with greater client improvement (Steinhelber,
Patterson, Cliffe, & LeGoullon, 1984).
Putney et al. (1992) reported that theoretical orientation may affect the
supervisor-supervisee relationship in that cognitive-behavioral supervisors
were perceived to assume a consultant role and to focus on skills and
strategies more than did humanistic, psychodynamic, or existential supervi-
sors. Humanistic, psychodynamic, and existential supervisors were perceived
as using a relationship model with a focus on conceptualization.
Supervisory emphasis on personal growth was valued more than a
technical-skills orientation (Allen et al., 1986). The best supervisors culti-
vated in supervisees a sense of accomplishment, imagination, respect, inner
harmony, and wisdom (P. D. Guest & Beutler, 1988). Supervisees preferred
an emphasis on learning personally relevant "artistic" aspects of psycho-
therapy (Allen et al., 1986).
Although supervisees and supervisors may not agree on what factors
make for the best supervision, there is consensus that the amount and quality
of supervision constitute one of the top criteria that differentiate first-choice
internship sites from others (Stedman, Neff, Donahoe, Kopel, et al., 1995).
In terms of differences in perception, Rotholz and Werk (1984) reported that
supervisees much preferred autonomy-giving behaviors, whereas supervisors
favored cognitive-structuring behaviors. Supervisors perceived best supervi-
sion to be based on feedback to the student, whereas supervisees valued being
directly taught in a supportive, facilitative relationship (E. L. Worthington &
Roehlke, 1979). Supervisees' expectations of the supervisory relationship
may have been lower in some instances than their perceptions of the actual
relationship. Supervisees experienced significantly higher levels of empathic
understanding, unconditional regard, and total relationship than they had
expected from their supervisors (J. C. Hansen, 1965).
Working Alliance
A strong working alliance has also been associated with greater satisfac-
tion with supervision (Ladany et al., 1999), and thus the ability to establish
this should be considered a supervisory competency. The working alliance
consists of a bond or relationship, agreement on goals, and agreement on
tasks (Bordin, 1994). Supervisory pairs with a strong emotional bond, in-
cluding trust, respect, and caring, experienced less role conflict and role
ambiguity. This finding implies that such pairs work through and resolve
40 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

conflicts more readily (Ladany & Friedlander, 1995). Greater self-disclosure
by the supervisor was associated with a stronger supervisory working alliance
(Ladany & Lehrman-Waterman, 1999). Goodyear and Bernard (1998) cited
Patton and Kivlighan's (1997) study relating the quality of the working
alliance between supervisor and supervisee and adherence to the intended
treatment model to the supervisor's final evaluation of the supervisee.
There have been several efforts to describe supervision stylistically.
Lochner and Melchert (1997; 32% response rate) added the dimensions
of cognitive style and manner of conceptualization of psychotherapy or
theoretical orientation. They found that whether the ideal supervisor should
be task oriented (an approach typically associated with a novice trainee)
or warm, supportive, and friendly depended on the supervisee's theoretical
orientation. Those interns who reported their theoretical orientation as
behavioral tended to prefer task-oriented supervisors, whereas interns with
a psychodynamic or humanistic theoretical orientation preferred supervisors
who were warm, supportive, and friendly.
Although they concluded that supervisory style is multidimensional,
encompassing parts of all styles, Friedlander and Ward (1984) differentiated
three metastyle categories. The first, "attractive," consists of components
connoting positive and supportive: friendly, warm, trusting, open, and flexi-
ble. The second, "interpersonally sensitive," includes an amalgam of percep-
tive and intuitive, including invested, committed, reflective, creative, and
resourceful. The third, "task oriented," includes descriptors depicting a goal-
oriented, didactic, and prescriptive focus that is thorough, evaluative, practi-
cal, and concrete. Cognitive-behavioral supervisors had higher task-oriented
ratings, whereas psychodynamic and humanistic supervisors were rated as
being more interpersonally sensitive and less task directed. It was predicted
that these styles would be correlated with other stylistic variables, including
self-disclosure (Ladany & Lehrman-Waterman, 1999).
Cherniss and Equatios (1977) described the best supervision styles as
insight oriented, with the supervisor asking questions designed to activate
the supervisee to solve problems independently, and feelings oriented, with
the supervisor encouraging the supervisee to question and deal with emo-
tional responses to the clinical process. The didactic-consultative style,
with the supervisor offering advice, suggestions, and interpretations concern-
ing client dynamics and clinical technique, was the most prevalent style
used in the community mental health settings studied, as well as what
supervisees preferred. The laissez-faire approach was negatively associated
with satisfaction, and the authoritative supervisory style was not correlated
with satisfaction. Cherniss and Equatios (1977) concluded that the ideal
supervisor combines multiple styles, with much higher frequencies of the
insight-oriented, feelings-oriented, and didactic—consultative styles.
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
41

The Developmental Model in Quality Supervision
The developmental model has direct relevance to what constitutes
the "best" supervisor. According to developmental models, the novice
trainee most highly values directive, didactic, technical-skills-based training
with a high degree of structure, whereas the advanced trainee prefers super-
vision involving issues of countertransference, theory-anchored conceptual-
izations with multiple levels, and emphasis on personal and professional
development. "Lousy supervisors" were not sensitive to developmental levels
or the developing skills of their supervisees (Magnuson, Wilcoxon, &
Norem, 2000).
SUPERVISEES WHOM SUPERVISORS PREFER
Because supervision is a two-way process, variables related to the super-
visee contribute significantly to good supervision. Although most research
has concerned supervisors from the point of view of the supervisee, several
studies have addressed characteristics of the supervisee that supervisors rate
as effective or desirable and that thus significantly contribute to supervisory
success. Especially because response to and effective use of supervision are
typically part of the evaluation component resulting in unstated expectations
being evaluated, it is important to articulate that the behaviors are compris-
ing effective response to and use of supervision. This definition of supervisee
role is referred to as role induction and is a significant component in orienting
the supervisee to the process of supervision (Vespia, Heckman-Stone, &
Delworth, 2002). A list of characteristics defining supervisees who use super-
vision well was developed, and ratings were collected from supervisees and
supervisors. Beginning supervisees rated "asks for help when appropriate"
as highest, whereas advanced supervisees ranked "demonstrates a willingness
to grow" highest. For interns, the highest ranked item was "actively partici-
pates in supervision sessions." In contrast, the highest ranked item for
supervisors was "implements supervisor's directives when client welfare is
of concern to supervisor." Vespia et al. highlighted items from nonempirical
post hoc analyses in which there were differences in ratings between supervi-
sors and supervisees. Supervisor ratings were lower than those of supervisees
for items on inviting feedback and demonstrating awareness of personal
dynamics. Similarly, Henderson et al. (1999) reported that only supervisees,
not supervisors, rated evaluation as contributing to effective supervision.
Vespia et al.'s Supervisor Utilization Rating Form shows promise in articulat-
ing supervisee behaviors effective for supervision and in highlighting differ-
ences in perceptions of supervisees and supervisors as a function of the
developmental level of each.
42 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Kauderer and Herron (1990) reported that supervisors viewed most
positively less dependent, assertive trainees who actively participated in the
process and limited their self-exploration, thus respecting the boundary
differentiating supervision from therapy. However, Kauderer and Herron's
sample size was very small, and the duration in which the study was conducted
was short.
Factors that supervisors have identified as contributing to effective
supervision include trainees' ability to integrate what they have learned in
class with conceptualization and therapy, ability to be aware of their own
emotional response to clients as the response happens, and ability to use
their own response in the therapy. Trainee abilities to form relationships
with clients, peers, and supervisors; be flexible; and adhere to ethical codes
and standards are all viewed by supervisors as supervisee-related factors
contributing to effective supervision (Henderson et al., 1999). From super-
visee ratings, Efstation, Patton, and Kardash (1990) identified rapport and
client focus as significant factors in the supervisory relationship. Supervisors
identified client focus, rapport, and identification (with the supervisor).
Wong and Wong (2002) expressed concern that supervisors may be
focusing too much on their own need for support and praise from supervisees.
They cited such statements as "supervisee admired my approach in therapy,"
"did his best to follow my directions," and "trusted in me and never ques-
tioned me" (p. 8), as behaviors viewed by supervisors as positive and cau-
tioned against the creation of submissive, obedient trainees.
DIFFERENCES ACROSS DISCIPLINES
Although congruence exists in best and worst supervisors across disci-
plines, there are several interesting findings specific to one discipline or
modality. For example, in training medical residents, the most highly valued
supervisors (a) allowed the resident to develop the story of his or her client
experience (Shanfield, Matthews, & Hetherly, 1993); (b) provided guidance
about highly charged clinical dilemmas (Shanfield, Hetherly, & Matthews,
2001), acknowledged personal concerns (Shanfield et al., 2001); and
(c) were empathic towards the supervisee (Shanfield, Mohl, Matthews, &
Hetherly, 1992).
In family therapy supervision, Liddle, Davidson, and Barrett (1988)
described criteria for which supervisor competence is correlated with trainee
satisfaction. In addition to the already discussed relationship, conceptualiza-
tion, and feedback skills, they placed value on the supervisor as a role model
and on a supervisor who can provide guidance that enables supervisee
autonomy, a supervisory structure that includes readings or tape analysis,
assistance in adapting models to the individual, supervision to fit the trainee's
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
43

skills and experience, training in self-assessment of strengths and weaknesses,
case consultation, and supervisory flexibility.
EMPIRICALLY SUPPORTED RESULTS
In a methodological review of some of the studies cited, Ellis and
Ladany (1997) concluded that there is empirical support for differentiation
of extreme qualities of supervision (best and worst); the potential importance
of goal setting in supervision; the different perception of supervision by
supervisors and supervisees, and the existence of differences between actual
and ideal supervision. However, overall, the quality of research during the
past 15 years has been substandard (Ellis & Ladany, 1997).
Most of the research is based on reports of supervisees and has no link
to treatment efficacy or other variables that one would expect to be positively
affected by excellent supervision. As Holloway and Carroll (1996) con-
eluded, "Losing that perspective (impact of clinical supervision on the client
outcome) is a bit like viewing parenthood solely for the enrichment of the
parents" (p. 54). Attention has not been directed to the difference between
supervisee satisfaction and supervisee effectiveness. As Goodyear and Ber-
nard (1998) stated in an analogy to customer satisfaction with a donut
factory, "To ask trainees about whether they were satisfied with supervision
or their supervisor gives minimal information about the 'nutritional' value
of their experience" (p. 10). It may be that satisfaction taps into liking,
pleasantness, relationship, or other variables but perhaps not to effectiveness
with clients or growth as a supervisee. Goodyear and Bernard concluded
that data indicate that if a supervisor likes a supervisee, the supervisor is
more likely to give the supervisee a positive evaluation. It would also seem
that if the supervisor likes the supervisee, the supervisee will often like the
supervisor as well. Supervisees also tend to give higher satisfaction ratings
to supervisors they like.
WORST SUPERVISORS
Styles Potentially Leading to Problematic Interactions
Problematic supervision can have a significant negative impact on
the supervisory process and ultimately on the supervisee. Kadushin (1968)
described interactional patterns or "games" prototypic of problematic super-
vision. Each was an interactive phenomenon in which maladaptive patterns
were established, akin to a dance in which supervisee behavior elicited
inappropriate supervisor behavior. These patterns resulted in boundary cross-
44 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

ings. In one example, the supervisee flattered the supervisor by praising
the supervisor's brilliant insights. The supervisor then found it difficult or
impossible to supervise or give corrective feedback because of the emotional
blackmail and the gratification of being viewed as omniscient. In another
example, the supervisee gradually redefined the supervisory relationship by
urging the supervisor to go out for coffee or lunch with him or her, transform-
ing the relationship into one of friendship rather than supervision. Another
supervisee alluded to areas of knowledge unknown to the supervisor (litera-
ture or theories), thereby changing the power differential and leading to
collusion or to the supervisor's covering up ignorance. Yet another supervisee
alluded to personal or professional experiences (such as substance use, rearing
children, or public service work), which placed him or her in an expert
position compared with the supervisor. One supervisee plied the supervisor
with such extensive lists of questions during the supervisory hour that
supervision was deflected from any case discussion or interaction. In another
example, the supervisee cast the supervisor as a capable, knowing parent
and was dependent on him or her for advice and guidance. In a different
game, the supervisee scrupulously followed the supervisor's suggestions and
input and then reported that they did not work. The supervisor ended up
defending his or her position and was accordingly placed in a position of
disadvantage, and supervision was derailed. Another supervisee expressed
confusion over contradictory input from several supervisors. The supervisor
then adopted a defensive stance, protecting his or her position against
competing supervisors. In another game, the supervisee flagellated him- or
herself about all the perceived mistakes he or she had made. The supervisor
found it necessary to support, reassure, and praise the supervisee and thus
avoided discussion of the "errors" themselves, as they elicited such angst in
the supervisee. In another example, the supervisee raised personal problems
and invited the "wise" supervisor to help solve them. The supervisor was
tempted to help and, if he or she had done so, might have actually crossed
the boundary into treatment. In yet another example, the supervisee dis-
agreed with the supervisor, and the supervisor redefined the interaction as
a supervisee psychological defense. One supervisee posed questions to the
supervisor, who then simply responded with other questions. In a supervisor-
initiated example, the supervisor redefines supervisee questions or disagree-
ment as resistance.
Each of these examples pinpoints potential pitfalls and vulnerabilities
in the supervisory relationship and its boundaries. Kadushin (1968) outlined
the losses to the supervisor of playing these games. However, ultimately,
dealing with the games as process issues provided potential for an all-around
win. A valuable exercise is to address each of these patterns in the context
of a supervisor-supervisee seminar and deal with them intellectually. Then,
when they arise in the supervisory context, they can be labeled and dealt
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
45

with directly. Identification and confrontation are very effective tools with
both supervisee and supervisor.
Worst Supervisors Across Disciplines
Studies of "worst" supervisors did not necessarily identify opposite
characteristics as those attributed to the "best" supervisors. Instead, each
end of the spectrum possessed its own characteristics (Hutt et al., 1983).
Magnuson et al. (2000) described overarching principles of "lousy supervi-
sion," a category described by E. L. Worthington (1987). Principles included
unbalanced supervision, which does not represent all elements of the supervi-
sion experience or focuses on detail to the exclusion of larger themes;
developmentally inappropriate supervision, which is not sensitive to the
individual developmental needs of the trainee, intolerant of differences or
not allowing the trainee to have separate views or styles from the supervisor;
poor modeling of professional and personal attributes, which occurs when
supervisors are untrained or poorly prepared to supervise and are profession-
ally apathetic, lazy, or uncommitted to the profession. Lousy supervision
included problems in the organizational-administrative, technical-
cognitive, and relational-affective spheres. In the 
organizational-
administrative sphere, neither expectations nor standards of accountability
were clear, and supervisee needs were not assessed. In the technical-
cognitive sphere, the supervisor was viewed as unskilled as a clinician and
supervisor and unreliable as a professional resource. In the relational-
affective sphere, the supervisor did not provide a safe environment, gave
too little or too much affirming and corrective feedback, was insensitive to
the trainee's developmental needs, and imposed a personal agenda, avoiding
issues that arose between supervisor and supervisee. It would appear that a
number of these categories violate part of Principle A in the Ethical Principles
of Psychologists and Code of Conduct to "do no harm" (American Psychological
Association, 2002a, p. 3). Although this is a preliminary analysis, it provides
direction for the converse: excellent-quality supervision.
Instances of worst supervisors cited by others include supervisors who
were lacking in effective teaching strategies and role modeling and supervi-
sors who were disinterested or inept. Although we know that trainees viewed
these supervisors as "worst," we do not know what evaluation each supervisor
would ascribe to him- or herself. Worst supervisors were unavailable or
lacked time for supervision, disagreed theoretically or conceptually with
supervisees, were too nondirective or vague, had personality conflicts with
supervisees, spent too much time on administrative issues, lacked expertise,
or discussed their own work too much (McCarthy et al., 1994). They can-
celed or interrupted supervision sessions or seemed distracted (Chung,
Baskin, & Case, 1998) and were preoccupied with and spent considerable
46 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

supervisory time discussing their personal problems (Allen et al, 1986;
Ladany & Walker, 2003). Worst supervisors were also authoritarian, encour'
aging conformity and punishing divergence from the "party line." Both
laissez-faire and authoritarian supervision styles were linked to low trainee
satisfaction (Cherniss & Equatios, 1977).
Worst supervisors emphasized the shortcomings of the trainee and were
inflexible and intolerant (Watkins, 1997c). They demeaned the supervisee
(Allen et al., 1986), were indirect or avoidant, or did not foster individuation
(Wulf & Nelson, 2000). The most significant aspect of "worst" supervision
experiences was relationship: Rather than feeling that the supervisor trusted
him or her, the supervisee reported feeling mistrusted. The trainee then
began to expect criticism rather than support. Cyclically, the supervisor did
not identify conflicts and take responsibility for exploring them, indicating
supervisory insensitivity (Hutt et al., 1983). "Worst" supervisors were defen-
sive and uninterested in training to improve supervisory skills (Watkins,
1997c).
Analysis of Negative Supervision
Several researchers have analyzed patterns or events pivotal to ineffec-
tual or bad supervision. Nelson and Friedlander (2001) analyzed supervisory
experiences that supervisees felt had had detrimental effects on their training.
They categorized the experiences into initiation of the relationship, impasse
characteristics, and contributing factors. In initiation of the relationship,
deleterious factors included supervisors who were remote and uncommitted
to the training relationship or too busy. Impasse characteristics included
the occurrence of power struggles or role conflicts precipitated by situations
in which the supervisee was perceived to have greater status by virtue of
age, experience, or knowledge. Also present in this category were role
(boundary) conflicts including supervisors attempting to be friends with the
supervisee, to confide in the supervisee, or to use the supervisee as a sounding
board. Other cases involved misunderstandings based on differences in
worldviews of gender or culture. The other contributing factors included
supervisees being made privy to internecine quarrels within the agency
or setting.
Negative supervision may be identified through specific negative
events. Ramos-Sanchez et al. (2002) found that 21.4% of their sample of
predoctoral interns and practicum students reported they had had a negative
event in supervision (28% response rate). Those who reported negative
experiences had weaker supervisory alliances and lower levels of satisfaction
with that supervisor. Some of the negative events involved harsh criticism
and judgmental attitudes. In exploration of what types of "counterproduc-
tive events" occur in supervision, Gray, Ladany, Walker, and Ancis (2001)
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
47

described the supervisor's dismissing the supervisee's conceptualizations in
favor of the supervisor's, inappropriate self-disclosure, being unprepared
for supervision, misunderstanding the supervisee, or focusing on negative
instances rather than areas of improvement. Supervisees reported having
negative thoughts during the counterproductive event about themselves,
the supervisor, or the supervisory relationship. Although the supervisees
wished that the event had been recognized or acknowledged directly and
then processed (and, in some instances, that they had taken the initiative
to do so), there was a sense of lack of safety in doing so. To these categories,
Veach (2001) added supervisory failure to address supervisee poor perfor-
mance as a category of "counterproductive events."
Other researchers have studied critical incidents (Ellis, 1991a) or major
turning points within the supervisory process with respect to relationship,
competence, emotional awareness, or autonomy. Consequences of these
incidents included the supervisee deferring to the supervisor, adopting a
guarded or hypervigilant stance, censoring or limiting expression, becoming
disengaged, proactively thinking of ways to facilitate better supervision (Gray
etal., 2001), or spuriously complying with what the supervisor indicated
(Moskowitz & Rupert, 1983). Spurious compliance refers to pretending to
do what the supervisor suggested, and then perhaps distorting process notes
or concealing difficulties in performance.
Ultimately, in some instances, the counterproductive supervisory event
had a negative impact on the client. Negative events were found most
frequently in the interpersonal relationships and style, in specific supervisory
tasks, and in the fulfillment of supervisory responsibilities. Problematic super-
vision is discussed further in chapter 8.
FACTORS INVOLVED IN HIGH-QUALITY SUPERVISION
Conflict Resolution
In a study addressing sources of conflict in supervision, Moskowitz and
Rupert (1983) provided insight into what effective supervisors did to handle
conflict, in light of the fact that 38% of their sample reported a major
conflict with a supervisor. Conflicts over style of supervision (direction and
support) were more readily resolved successfully, whereas solutions to conflict
over theoretical orientation or therapeutic approach were more difficult to
formulate and substantially less successful. Most difficult to resolve, and
most frequently reported, were conflicts involving personality issues. There
was strong indication that trainees preferred supervisors to take the lead in
identification and discussion of conflict situations. Eighty-six percent of the
158 participants preferred that the supervisor identify and initiate discussion
48 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

of the conflict situation, compared with the 13.9% who preferred that the
supervisor identify the problem and wait for the trainee to initiate discussion.
Forty of 52 practicum students indicated they had initiated a discussion
with supervisors. The discussion led to some improvement in the supervisory
situation in over half of the 40 cases. For the small group of trainees who
had discussions that did not lead to improvement, the supervisor did not
change his or her behavior in the way the student had desired, or the
supervisor felt that the trainee's personal problem was the crux of the conflict.
Key elements in effective supervision were that supervisors identified
problems and initiated discussion of them. Simply identifying the problem
and waiting for the supervisee to initiate discussion was substantially less
desirable. A significant issue was how the supervisor responded to complaints,
the trainee's raising issues of conflict, or negative feedback by the supervisee.
Trainees often raise the issue that when they attempted to complain, discuss
conflict, or provide negative feedback, the supervisor became confronta-
tional, defensive, accusatory, or outright angry. It is critical for supervisors
to respond nondefensively to supervisees' negative feedback or highlighting
of areas of disagreement. Practicing nondefensive response would be an
excellent role-play activity for supervisory seminars or support groups.
Disclosure With Supervisors
The competency of establishing a good supervisory alliance, with trust
and communication, is essential to effective supervision. Ladany and Walker
(2003) suggested that supervisory disclosures directly influence the emotional-
bond component of the supervisory alliance by communicating trust. Sec-
ondarily, disclosures by the supervisor may model and encourage supervisee
self-disclosure. Ladany, Hill, Corbett, and Nutt (1996) reported an average
of eight nondisclosures to the supervisors in their study and that the issues
involved were of moderate importance. Most often, nondisclosures con-
cerned negative reactions to supervisors, personal issues, evaluation con-
cerns, clinical mistakes, or general clinical observations. Ninety percent of
those surveyed had experienced a negative reaction to a supervisor that
they did not disclose. Nondisclosures occurred because the trainee viewed
the information as unimportant, too personal, involving feelings that were
too negative or feared that the supervisory alliance was not strong. Yourman
and Farber (1996) also reported that 39.8% of their sample (35.2% response
rate) failed to inform supervisors of their perceived clinical errors at a
moderate to high frequency. Further, 30% never or only infrequently dis-
closed to the supervisor when they thought he or she was wrong. Nearly
50% of the sample reported that they told the supervisor what he or she
wanted to hear, and 59% reported that they never or only infrequently felt
comfortable disclosing negative feelings toward their supervisor. The only
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
49

protective factors enhancing disclosure were discussion of countertransfer-
ence and supervisee satisfaction.
Ninety one percent of trainees polled in one study reported at least one
self-disclosure having been made by their supervisor (21% return rate). Most
frequent categories were personal issues, neutral counseling experiences, and
counseling struggles (Ladany & Lehrman-Waterman, 1999). Seventy three
percent of supervisors made at least one personal self-disclosure. Ladany and
Lehrman-Waterman (1999) reflect on the time lost to supervision, placing
needs over supervisee, and risk for role reversal. In contrast, self-disclosures
relating to supervisors' emotional reactions to clients, their own counseling
struggles and successes, personal feedback on the supervisory relationship,
general professional experiences, and didactic mentoring providing vicarious
experiences, all appeared to be facilitative. There may be differing perceptions
regarding supervisory events affecting disclosures. Although their study had
a very small sample and had other methodological issues, Reichelt and Skjerve
(2002) reported only low to moderate correspondence in how supervisors and
supervisees perceived supervisory events. In the case of low correspondence,
there was a relationship to supervisor didactic style, a hidden agenda, strong
opinions, and avoidance of discussion of the trainee's emotional reactions in
client discussion. In contrast, a trainee-centered approach, a direct style, and
exploration of trainee thoughts and ideas were associated with a high
correspondence of supervisor and supervisee perceptions. Further exploration
is necessary to identify competencies associated with conflict prevention,
resolution, and disclosures to understand the facilitating factors.
Supervisors also had significant rates of nondisclosures to supervisees:
Ninety-eight percent of the supervisors in the Ladany and MelincofPs (1999)
study reported that they have withheld information from their trainees.
Most often (in 74% of the cases), the information withheld was the supervi-
sor's negative reaction to the supervisee's professional performance or ther-
apy, and it was not disclosed because of a perceived developmental process
into which the behavior fit or because the supervisor felt that the trainee
was not ready for the particular feedback. Supervisors also sometimes chose
to address the issue less directly and more generally. The second most
frequent type of case (67%) was that supervisors did not disclose personal
issues relating to their own life, an appropriate boundary definition. Negative
reactions to the trainee's performance accounted for 56% of nondisclosures;
trainee personal issues, 37%; negative self-efficacy of the supervisor, 32%;
dynamics of the training site, 27%; the supervisor's clinical and professional
issues, 22%; trainee appearance, 18%; positive reactions to the trainee's coun-
seling and professional performance, 11%; attraction to the trainee, 10%; reac-
tions to the trainee's clients, 4%; and experiences as a supervisor with other
trainees, 4%. It is noteworthy that supervisors did not disclose both negative
and positive impressions. More evaluative feedback would be beneficial to the
50 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

trainee. Culture is a significant factor in issues of self-disclosure. Constantine
and Kwan (2003) described considerations for client—therapist dyads that are
applicable to the supervisor—supervisee—client triad. They proposed consid-
erations of "inescapable" (p. 584) self-disclosures such as skin color and
inadvertent self-disclosures such as those that occur through transference—
countertransference to guide deliberate therapist self-disclosure. Awareness
and assessment of client (and supervisee) response to the first two categories
should then guide subsequent deliberate self-disclosures.
Mentoring
A component of trainee socialization that has been highly rated by
those who experience it is mentoring. Johnson (2002) draws from multiple
definitions to describe the mentor as someone who "provides the protege
with knowledge, advice, challenge, counsel and support in the protege's
pursuit of becoming a full member of a particular profession" (p. 88). The
mentor serves as a teacher, adviser, and role model, typically without have
received any training or supervision in the process. Mentoring is distin-
guished from supervision by virtue of its volitional quality (i.e., it is typically
sought out by the protege), lack of an evaluative or legal component associ-
ated with supervision, and longer duration. However, some supervisors do
become mentors to their supervisees. Koocher (2002) encourages us to call
recipients of mentoring "mentor's charges" rather than proteges to avoid
masculinization of the concept. Mentor's charges advance more rapidly in
their careers and report enhanced professional-identify development and
career satisfaction. Interestingly, fewer clinical psychology students (53%)
have been mentored than those in other areas of psychology (73%; Johnson,
Koch, Fallow, & Huwe, 2000) and PsyDs are less likely than PhDs to be
mentored (Clark, Harden, & Johnson, 2000). Mentoring occurs frequently
in business executive programs.
Increased interest in abusive (Tepper, 2000), dysfunctional (Johnson
& Huwe, 2002), and negative (Eby, McManus, Simon, & Russell, 2000)
supervision practices has drawn attention to the darker side of mentoring,
which had previously received scant attention. Because, like the supervisor,
the mentor holds greater power, there is potential for abuse relating to the
unbalance in the mentor-charge relationship. A dysfunctional relationship
is defined as unproductive or is characterized primarily as conflictual, result-
ing in distress of one or both members. Results can be exploitation, sabotage,
or tyranny. Because of the multiple roles mentoring brings to a relationship,
it is critical to devote attention to its ethical considerations (Johnson &
Nelson, 1999). There is some consensus that potential mentors require more
preparation, training, and support and that value be attached to the function
of mentoring. For example, in academic settings, minority faculty were
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
51

reported to be excessively in demand as mentors by all students, but were
given no credit for that function and still needed to complete committee
and research responsibilities and quotas (Dickinson & Johnson, 2000).
Johnson and Huwe (2002) suggest preventative strategies for dysfunction,
including creation of a culture of mentoring, assessment of new faculty hires
as potential mentors, using mentorship skills as a criterion when hiring new
faculty members, mentor training, mentor monitoring, providing rewards
for faculty members who are mentors, and creation of a clear structure for
addressing dysfunction.
Culture
The role of culture in "best" and "worst" supervision has been sorely
neglected. One exception is a pilot study to explore critical incidents in
supervision, conducted with 18 racial-ethnic minority students who had
completed their APA-approved internship in a university counseling center
(Fukuyama, 1994a). When both supervisors and supervisees were asked
to offer positive and negative incidents and to describe organizational or
environmental conditions that contributed to their professional develop-
ment, a number of categories emerged. Supervisees preferred openness and
support, as well as not being stereotyped. Supervisees valued supervisors
demonstrating belief in their clinical work with difficult clients, most espe-
cially when cultural issues were presented; supervisees valued culturally-
specific supervision that addressed cultural implications both for supervisees
and for clients; and opportunities for multicultural experience through which
they may enhance their expertise. The few negative incidents reported
(N =4) included lack of supervisor awareness of cultural-specific norms
(e.g., interpreting culturally consistent behavior as countertransference),
use of expressions offensive to the supervisee, and questioning of supervisee
interpretation of client behavior as culturally relevant when the supervisee
and client shared same cultural heritage.
In a study of supervisor and supervisee perceptions of cultural factors,
McRoy, Freeman, Logan, & Blackmon (1986) described cross-cultural barri-
ers to supervisory relationships, including language barriers, prejudice or
bigotry, lack of knowledge of cultural differences, student defensiveness,
and differences in opinions, background, and life experiences. Twenty-eight
percent of the reporting field supervisors and 16 percent of the trainees
indicated they had experienced an actual problem in these areas.
It is strongly advised that cultural and diversity issues be addressed in
supervision. This is a competency area for supervision and is relevant for
supervisees from ethnic or racial minority groups (McNeill, Horn, & Perez,
1995) as well as for supervisees and supervisors from any ethnic or racial
52 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

group and their clients (Wisnia & Falender, 1999). Supervision should be
guided by an attitude of discovery, exploration, and critical thinking, rather
than political correctness (Stone, 1997). Competency includes respect and
a strong knowledge base in multicultural psychology. It may be that flexibility
is an antidote to stereotyping: Stereotypes are lacking in flexibility (Abreu,
2001), and thus flexibility might relate to a cognitive frame of openness.
It has been suggested that acts of discrimination and racism may occur
covertly, either accidentally or intentionally, as a result of ignorance and
misunderstanding (McNeill et al.). Recognition of the Eurocentric influence
on theory, intervention, (McNeill et al.) and the general lens with which
we approach culture needs to be acknowledged. Constantine (1997) reported
that 30% of predoctoral interns and 70% of supervisors in her sample had
never completed a multicultural or cross-cultural counseling course. As J. M.
Bernard (1994) suggested, a minimum requirement for supervision is being
as multiculturally competent as one's supervisees. A more complete discus-
sion of these issues is provided in chapter 6.
Gender
Allen et al. (1986) reported gender differences on several dimensions,
but the overall quality of supervision was unrelated to the supervisor's gender.
Differences include less encouragement of the assumption of power in female
trainees (Nelson & Holloway, 1990), female relational focus versus male
client focus (Sells, Goodyear, Lichtenberg, & Polkinghorne, 1997), and, in
general, are affected by gender stereotypes within supervision (J. M. Bernard
& Goodyear, 1998). Feminist supervisors informally described unconditional
positive regard combined with intellectual and personal challenge as best
(Porter & Vasquez, 1997).
In terms of preferred characteristics from male supervisees, the "best"
supervisors placed heavy emphasis on evaluation and peer observation. Male
supervisees also found technical aspects of supervision more salient. For
females, the absence of sexist attitudes and practices was rated as optimal
(Allen, et al., 1986). To male supervisees, the "worst" supervisors were those
for whom one had to compete with other supervisees for attention. Also
rated worst were supervisors who did not teach practical skills and did not
encourage exploration of new psychotherapeutic strategies (Allen et al.,
1986). For female supervisees, the "worst" supervisors used sexist language,
emphasized traditional sex role stereotypes, subtly devalued the supervisee
on the basis of sex, or violated personal privacy. Feminist working-group
members described worst supervisors as overdirecting or requiring confor-
mity; pathologizing supervisee conflicts, worries, or problems; and promoting
sexist or racist interpretations (Porter & Vasquez, 1997).
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
53

PREFERRED SUPERVISORY FORMATS
In a compilation of previous research on preferred supervisory formats
for family therapy, Goodyear and Nelson (1997) contrasted supervisor and
trainee reports of effectiveness. In the review, the most highly rated forms
of supervision were "supervisor and trainee review videotapes of therapy
sessions" and "live supervision using phone call-ins to direct the trainee".
Both trainees and supervisors rated these forms as 1st and 2nd choices.
There was some divergence with respect to the 3rd choice, with supervisors
rating "trainee participation on a treatment team behind the one-way mirror"
and trainees rating "supervisor conducts co-therapy with trainee" and "train-
ees' participate on treatment team behind one-way mirror." "Live supervision
using a mid-session break to consult with trainee" was ranked 4th by supervi-
sors and 5th by trainees. The most frequently used form of supervision for
trainees and supervisors was "individual case consultation," which accounted
for in excess of 85% of the responses by both trainees and supervisors.
Individual case consultation was rated as the 14th most favored format by
supervisors and the 10th most favored format by trainees (out of 17 possible
rankings), confirming McCarthy et al.'s (1988) "myth" that individual super-
vision was the best. Group supervision was the second most frequently
used modality and was ranked 5th by supervisors and 9th by trainees. The
techniques most frequently used by supervisees, "use of specific readings
related to a specific case" and "supervisor demonstrates specific therapy skills
for supervisee," were not highly ranked by trainees or by supervisors (rankings
of 12th to 17th). The lowest ranked forms of supervision were reviewing
written verbatim transcripts with supervisees, "live supervision using an
earphone to direct supervisee" (especially low ranked by trainees), and
"family sculpting," or having families form actual spatial body placements
to represent relationships in family therapy.
It is interesting to contrast these findings with Nelson (1978), in which
videotaping and supervisor observation were the methods most preferred
for acquiring information regarding trainee's therapy sessions, but trainees
observing supervisors performing therapy and supervisors acting as a cothera-
pist to trainees were more highly ranked as methods of teaching therapy
techniques. Training-program directors rated cotherapy as being the strong-
est method for supervision, followed by live supervision, videotape review,
audiotape review, and self-report only (Romans, Boswell, Carlozzi, & Fergu-
son, 1995). Supervisees reported that they preferred less emphasis on discus-
sion and more on demonstration by supervisor or videotape and on observa-
tion across their graduate training (Gonsalvez, Oades, & Freestone, 2002).
Milne and Oliver (2000) found that while all their participants made use
of individual supervision (100%), there was interest in the more flexible
formats of group supervision (used by 43% of participants) and cotherapy
54 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION
