(29%). However, resistance to change, the possibility of neglecting weaker
trainees, and the extra coordination and time required were given as reasons
that alternative forms of supervision were not implemented.
There was a discrepancy between the most commonly used forms of
supervision and the forms of supervision that were most highly ranked by
trainees and supervisors. It appeared that the expediency of individual-case
consultation won out over other, more highly valued forms, even though the
latter were viewed by training directors as an effective mode of supervision
(Romans et al., 1995). However, this result may have occured because this
area has been so infrequently studied and the results have not been linked
to treatment (client) outcomes. Should it be shown that trainees who
receive review of videos of the sessions achieve substantially higher treatment
compliance, attendance, and resolution of problem behavior, it is likely that
videotaping would occur more frequently. This trend may be strengthened
by Ellis, Krengel, and Beck's (2002) findings that, contrary to popular belief,
supervisor observation behind a one-way mirror, audio taping, and videotap-
ing do not elicit significant deleterious counselor anxiety and performance.
It is also significant that the Association for Counselor Education and
Supervision's (1995) "Ethical Guidelines for Counseling Supervisors" (not
adopted by APA) define audiotaping and videotaping of sessions as a standard
of care. The highest level of client protection, best vicarious learning, and
possibility of taking on more difficult clients were all maximized through live
supervision. Video review and live supervision both allowed for immediate
feedback, access to actual trainee and client verbal and nonverbal behaviors,
and potential for supervision intervention and treatment intervention
(Goodyear & Nelson, 1997).
Intricacies of videotape supervision were delineated by Breunlin, Kar-
rer, McGuire, and Cimmarusti (1988). Six guidelines were provided to
attenuate affective and cognitive processes and provide optimum supervision
in this modality. These guidelines include focusing by setting supervision
goals related to trainee development; relating the internal process across
contexts so that feelings may be ventilated soon after the session, in the
context of the goals; selecting tape segments that focus on remedial perfor-
mance or approaches that the trainee is capable of changing; using comments
to compare observations of the session with the established goals, refining
goals moderately; and maintaining a moderate level of arousal (a midpoint
between relaxation and stress). These practices allow enough stimulation
to activate supervisees, but not so much stress as to overwhelm them.
Although group supervision is conducted by 65% of surveyed predoc-
toral internship sites (51% return rate) with 73% of the sites spending some
time in group processes (Riva & Cornish, 1995), it is not a predominant
format for supervision even though its merits have been lauded (Marcus &
King, 2003). For example, the emotional learning component enhanced by
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
55

the informal camaraderie are potential benefits (Marcus & King, 2003).
There may be less comfort in providing it, as very little attention has been
devoted to the methodology of group supervision as being distinct from
individual supervision (J. M. Bernard & Goodyear, 1998) or to the compo-
nents that make it most successful. In a single-subject case study, group
cohesion and receipt of guidance in their individual counseling work were
aspects of a positive group-supervision experience (Werstlein & Borders,
1997). Riva and Cornish (1995) suggested exploration of therapeutic factors,
leadership style, and group cohesion as potential correlates of successful
supervision. Benefits of the group format include economy of time, money,
and expertise; less dependence on the supervisor; provision for trainees' self-
evaluation relative to their peers; multiple perspectives on each client and
exposure to more clients; modeling of the giving of feedback to promote
growth; ability of the supervisor to observe the trainee in a different context;
and facilitation of risk-taking and action techniques (J. M. Bernard &
Goodyear, 1998). The group may provide a reflective space, a mirror, and
a secure base for the beginning trainee (Scanlon, 2002). However, Enyedy
et al. (2003) described processes hindering group supervision, including
between-member problems, problems with supervisors, supervisee anxiety
or other negative affects, logistical constraints, and poor group time manage-
ment. Facilitating group supervision entails facilitating positive aspects of
group interaction and feedback rather than overweighing negative features,
addressing diversity issues that may affect the process, providing structure
to the group (in process and time), and normalizing anxiety. Given that
group supervision is such a highly rated format, it warrants more system-
atic exploration.
WHAT DOES AN UNDERSTANDING OF "BEST" AND "WORST"
SUPERVISORS CONTRIBUTE TO ACTUAL PRACTICE
OF SUPERVISION?
We suggest that the highest quality of supervision occurs in the context
where there are multiple levels of support for each level of supervisor,
even the most experienced; where there is an atmosphere of benevolence,
nurturance, hope, and optimism; and where a sense of humor is maintained.
The supervision is strength based and embedded within a competency-based
curriculum that is modified depending on the needs of the training group
and individuals within it. There is a constant input and influx of new
models, information, interventions, and the most current thinking in the
field. Attention is devoted to professionalism, including ethics, legal consid-
erations, and modeling of the roles of psychologists and other mental
health professionals.
56 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

One of the major findings is the importance of the supervisory
relationship:
• Bidirectional trust, respect, and facilitation were hallmarks of
a strong supervisory relationship.
• Committing enthusiasm and energy to supervision was critical.
• The amount of time devoted, the sanctity of the time commit-
ment, sensitivity to the supervisee's developmental needs, en-
couragement of autonomy, and disclosure of discomfort were
also highly valued qualities of the "best" supervisors.
• In the "best" supervisory relationship, there was comfort in
disclosure of perceived errors, by either member of the supervi-
sory dyad. However, the responsibility for identifying discomfort
or conflict lies with the supervisor.
• Confrontation is a desirable component, as are clarity of expec-
tations, regular feedback, and evaluation mechanisms.
• How the supervisor responds to complaints, the trainee's raising
issues of conflict, or negative feedback from supervisee to super-
visor is very critical in the supervisory relationship. Trainees
often raise the issue that, during training sessions, they find
the supervisor confrontive, defensive, accusatory, or outright
angry. It is critical for supervisors to respond nondefensively
to supervisees' negative feedback or highlighting of areas of
disagreement.
• Pernicious and harmful supervision appear to be more prevalent
than previously suspected (Ellis, 2001; Nelson & Friedlander,
2001; Gray et al., 2001). Ellis purposes teaching supervisees
their rights and responsibilities so that they are more likely to
appropriately confront supervisors or attempt to seek help from
training directors or others.
• The use of videotaping of sessions or live supervision greatly
enhances supervisory effectiveness and general accountability.
Videoing role-play of supervisory vignettes is also recommended.
• If, after reading the section on "worst" supervisors, one identifies
with the characteristics or has been told by supervisees that
some of them apply to oneself, the individual needs to examine
his or her attitudes toward supervision, experience, and level
of supervisory training:
• Veach's (2001) framework is useful in assessing the problem: Is
lack of knowledge, lack of skills, motivational issues, personal
impairment, transference-countertransference issues, cultural
difference, or administrative constraints at the heart of the
difficulty?
WHAT MAKES FOR GOOD SUPERVISION? 
57

• It would be important to get some consultation or supervision
on supervisory style.
• Veach (2001) advocated that peer-group supervision be man-
dated for supervisors, as well as training in conflict resolution.
• In addition, there needs to be time allotted administratively
for the development of strong alliances and for appropriate
supervision (Nelson, Gray, Friedlander, Ladany, & Walker,
2001).
Competencies
We now provide competencies inferred from the literature on "best" supervision.
They are not empirically supported. The competencies are as follows:
• Capacity to enhance trainee self-confidence through support, appropriate
autonomy, and encouragement
• Capacity to model strong working alliances and develop strong supervisory
alliances with the supervisee
• Ability to dispense feedback, give constructive criticism, and provide formative
and summative evaluation
• Knowledge of multiple formats of supervision and skill in each of these
formats.
• Adaptability and flexibility
• Excellent communication of case conceptualization, with strong theoretical
underpinnings
• Ability to maintain equilibrium and, as appropriate, a sense of humor, even in
the face of crises
• Ability to identify and bring up potential conflict situations or areas of
discomfort with the supervisee
• Openness to self-evaluation and to evaluation by supervisees and peers
58 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

3
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE
Competencies and core content associated with their development have
been central issues in psychology for decades, both in determining psychology
curricula and in defining standards for licensure and practice. Approaches to
definition include the input model, which focuses on the educational curricula
needed to produce a competent psychologist, and the output model, which
outlines the roles or activities a competent psychologist should be able to
perform to practice independently (Roe, 2002). Competence in supervision
is essential to both input and output models and is a mechanism ensuring that
each occur. In this section, we consider the dimensions of input- and output-
model competence of both the psychologist and the supervisor. We also
discuss the history of the definition of the competent psychologist, how
other fields approach competency, assessment of competency, the competent
psychology trainee, the competent psychology supervisor, and the process of
becoming such a supervisor. Understanding competencies is a critical part
of constructing a training program and is a component part of the develop-
ment of supervision contracts and assessment and evaluation procedures.
THE COMPETENT PSYCHOLOGIST:
HISTORY AND CURRENT CONCEPTIONS
Competence as a psychologist has been defined in terms of "learned
ability to adequately perform a task, duty or role" (Roe, 2002, p. 195), with
59

the caveat that it relates to particular work in specific settings and that it
involves integration of knowledge, skills, and values. To this, Kaslow (2002)
adds the necessity of achievement of a standard accepted by the field. In
addition, there are metacompetencies, or abilities to judge one's own level
of acquisition and use of competencies (Kaslow, 2002), and subcompetencies.
Subcompetencies refer to functions that integrate knowledge, skills, and
attitudes (e.g., administering tests or conducting group therapy). Compe-
tence is a necessary, but not sufficient, condition for performance. Other
personal (e.g., motivation and energy) and situational (e.g., social support,
management, and availability of tools) factors play a critical role in whether
competence translates into performance (Roe, 2002).
We first turn to the input model. In his critical history of psychology's
movement toward a competency-based curriculum, Weiss (1991) described
that, as early as the Boulder conference in 1949, it was assumed that the
training of clinical psychologists would have a common core, leaving room
for significant individuality to be displayed by the universities. Summarizing
conclusions of the NCSPP 1989-1990 conference, Weiss stated, "(a) the
core competency areas should be the organizing principle for curriculum
construction, and (b) a content-based core curriculum should not be an
end in itself (p. 21).
The idea of evaluating competence in psychology training and curricula
dates back to the 1973 Vail conference (Weiss, 1991) and was articulated
in the Mission Bay resolutions as well. The resolutions resulted in a frame-
work of superordinate characteristics that describe a competent psychologist
and are consistent with the output model. Polite and Bourg (1991) described
the resolutions that the Mission Bay conference proposed. Relationship
competency, or establishing and maintaining a therapeutic relationship, was
described as foundational and as the prerequisite for all other competencies
in psychology, across theoretical orientations. Other components of profes-
sional competence provided descriptors of knowledge, skills, and attitudes
that were later defined as the pillars of competence (Roe, 2002). The
knowledge included knowledge of self and others and expert knowledge of
relevant data in one or more areas of psychology. The skills articulated were
communicating empathy, engaging others, setting others at ease, establishing
rapport, and communicating a sense of respect. The attitudes encompassed
intellectual curiosity, flexibility, scientific skepticism, open-mindedness, psy-
chological health, belief that change can occur, appreciation of diversity,
integrity and honesty; and capacity for empathy, respect for others, personal
relatedness, and self-awareness (resolution reported by Polite & Bourg, 1991,
from Mission Bay Conference Resolutions for Professional Psychology Pro-
grams, 1987).
The integration of these concepts into training is reflected in the
revised guidelines for professional psychology training published by the
60 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

American Psychological Association (APA) in 1996 and later amended,
which provide a mechanism for implementation of competency-based evalu-
ation and program design, bridging the input and output models (APA,
2002e). "Domain B: Program Philosophy, Objectives and Training Plan"
of APA's Guidelines and Principles for Accreditation of Programs in Professional
Psychology (2002e) states the following:
The program specifies education and training objectives in terms of the
competencies expected of its graduates. Those competencies must be
consistent with (1) the program's philosophy and training model; and
(b) the substantive area(s) of professional psychology for which the
program prepares its interns for the entry level of practice, (p. 12)
Domain B also says that
[i]n achieving its objectives, the program requires that all interns demon-
strate an intermediate to advanced level of professional psychological
skills, abilities, proficiencies, competencies, and knowledge in the areas
of: (a) Theories and methods of assessment and diagnosis and effective
intervention (including empirically supported treatments); (b) Theories
and/or methods of consultation, evaluation, and supervision; (c) Strate-
gies of scholarly inquiry; and (d) Issues of cultural and individual diver-
sity that are relevant to all of the above. (APA, 2002e, p. 13)
In Domain B, competencies are defined in terms of specific skills
and areas of knowledge. Each program is expected to tailor competencies
corresponding to an intermediate to advanced level expected of its graduates.
In light of the finding that empirically supported interventions were not
predominant in training (a finding supported by Hays et al., 2002)—or, as
Barlow (1981) had stated years before, that clinical research has minimal,
if any, influence on clinical practice. An agenda was to increase the research
and empirical side of training. Site visitors focus on methods of assessing
competence and assuring that criteria for successful program completion are
defined and met, with procedures in place for trainees who are not meeting
the criteria. Whether there is a set of "core competencies" defining a psychol-
ogy curriculum or whether competencies can be idiosyncratic and syntonic
with a particular articulated program remains at issue (Benjamin, 2001).
The fear that competency assessment will lead to the similar development
of all trainees or to all trainees reaching identical end points was expressed
by those who opposed competency-based instruction (Weiss, 1991).
Using competence as a standard, psychologists moved from normative
to criterion-based conceptualizations and assessment. Multiple definitions
of competency have emerged. On the output side are designation of a
particular, agreed-on skill set (as in Domain B); defined sets of higher order
capabilities or characteristics; consistent levels of performance; and criterion-
reference. On the input side is analysis of tasks into sequential increments.
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE 
61

Professional competency has been described as "a complex, multidimensional
construct that includes both applied skills and psychological fitness" (Proci-
dano, Busch-Rossnagel, Reznikoof, & Geisinger, 1995, p. 426). A pragmatic
approach to competence was proposed by Shaw and Dodson (1988). They
described a competent psychologist as a psychologist who manifests (a) use
of a theoretical or conceptual frame to direct therapy, (b) memory of the
client's central issues, (c) skillful use of intervention techniques to promote
desired change in behavior or to set the stage for conditions of change, and
(d) knowledge of when to apply (or not to apply) these interventions. We
add (e) knowledge of self and role of the self and (f) knowledge of the role
of culture, ethnicity, gender, and variables of diversity of the self, client
(family), and community in the interaction.
We now move on to specific competency domains. In summarizing
areas of competence, Gould and Bradley (2001) added unnamed interper-
sonal skills and multicultural competencies to theoretical knowledge and
skills in therapy-related behaviors. The National Council of Schools and
Programs in Professional Psychology (Peterson et al., 1991) defined six com-
petency areas, which were expanded on by Sumerall et al. (2000), who
advocated a developmental process for the assessment of competency, with
"competency at one stage remains dependent on competency at preceding
stages" (p. 12). The development and maintenance of effective working
relationships is the first component of this process. Assessment, intervention,
and use of advanced clinical skills follow, as do research, knowledge of a
systematic model of inquiry involving problem identification, acquisition,
organization, and interpretation of information relating to psychological
phenomena. Next are education or facilitation to enhance growth of knowl-
edge, skills, and attitudes in the learner (client, student, or other), and
management of activities that direct, organize, or control services that psy-
chologists and others offer to the public, including supervision.
Ethics, including knowledge and execution of problem-solving strate-
gies addressing conflicts related to moral values, ethics, and law, is another
core competency. A basic competency in this area is the development of
appropriate attitudes toward the understanding of concepts such as individual
differences, cultural diversity, and professional development. The develop-
mental concept espoused by Sumerall et al. (2000), congruent with the
developmental model, is important because not all competencies are estab-
lished at the same time. The definition of competencies required by an
adequate, but not expert, practitioner, potentially supplies a common lan-
guage for discussing effectiveness and around which the culture of a program
may be organized (Stratford, 1994).
Rather than articulating particular competencies necessary for a psy-
chologist, exit criteria from a training sequence may be defined. Robiner,
Fuhrman, and Ristvedt (1993) described the exit criteria proposed by the
62 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Joint Council on Professional Education in Psychology, which include effec-
tive interpersonal functioning and ability to make sound professional judg-
ments, self-assessment of personal strengths and limitations, and the need
for continued supervision, consultation, and education. Also proposed are
the ability to extend and expand basic assessment and intervention tech-
niques to meet the needs of diverse settings, problems, and populations; the
ability to apply ethical and legal principles to practice; and, ultimately, the
development of a primary professional identity as a psychologist with ade-
quate self-awareness to choose appropriate advanced training (Stigall et al.,
1990, cited by Robiner etal., 1993, p. 5). This approach is an admirable
effort that requires only operationalization for measurement.
In an approach to an output model of competency specific to particular
defined areas of task analysis, competency has been described as MASTERY
(Fantuzzo, 1984), an acronym that stands for mastering knowledge, assessing
skill competency, setting minimal competency standards, training to compe-
tency, evaluating understanding of relevant legal and ethical principles, re-
viewing skill level, and yielding to continuing education. The MASTERY
algorithm has been used successfully in child-intelligence testing administra-
tion. The content of the task needs to be clearly defined, as do specific
competencies, making it relatively easy to identify and assess skill sets and
rendering this approach comparable to some of the medical and allied
medical skill and task analyses and potentially applicable to that for higher
level competencies.
MEDICAL, DENTAL, AND ALLIED HEALTH
PROFESSIONALS' APPROACHES
Members of other disciplines, sometimes with the assistance of psychol-
ogists, have developed definitions and assessments of competency that are
sometimes more sophisticated than those used within psychology training
settings. Examples of such fields include business management (McClelland,
1998), medicine (Epstein & Hundert, 2002; Neufeld, 1985), nursing (Brady
et al., 2001), dentistry (McCann, Babler, & Cohen, 1998), and allied health
professions (American Society for Healthcare Education and Training,
1994), all of which contain examples of studies and implementations of
competency evaluations of performance. Many of these professions use com-
binations of competency measures for accreditation and licensure, and most
focus on the output model.
In medicine, significant attention is devoted to the physician's cogni-
tive process, including clinical reasoning, clinical judgment, problem-
solving, and critical incidents (asking candidates to identify, from their own
experience, incidents that had a positive or negative effect on the quality
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE 
63

of patient care; Norman, 1985) in addition to the gradated sequences of
skills. A physicians' definition of competence is "the habitual and judicious
use of communication, knowledge, technical skills, clinical reasoning, emo-
tions, values, and reflection in daily practice for the benefit of the individual
and the community being served" (Epstein & Hundert, 2002, p. 2).
In dentistry, competencies are classified into the domains of profession-
alism, assessment of the patient and his or her oral environment, establish-
ment and maintenance of a healthy oral environment, restoration, health
promotion, and practice administration. Aspects of practice beyond the
technical essentials of dentistry are included. Psychology has not included
practice management, dealing with HMOs and insurance companies, or
other, more applied aspects, including supervision, as part of its competen-
cies. It would be useful for psychologists to consider the example set by
dentistry in this regard. Self-assessment is an intrinsic part of evaluation,
as it is viewed as a tool to enhance feelings of competence, and the use of
self-assessment in the evaluation process is intended in part to instill it as
a lifelong practice (McCann et al., 1998). Another valuable schema is that
the performance to be evaluated is to closely resemble the competency as
it is performed in practice. Following this dictum, psychology certification
could use procedures like those suggested by McNamara (1975) in concept
evaluation and simulation to test working conceptual strategies. Peer review
is another evaluation device for skill assessment.
An approach proposed by psychiatrists that seeks to describe the over-
riding competency set identifies attributes of the supervisee that "facilitate
the process of learning psychotherapy" (Rodenhauser, Rudisill, &. Painter,
1989, p. 370). The attributes are divided into basic personal qualities of
supervisees in general (e.g., openness, reliability, and integrity), of supervis-
ees as facilitators of relationships with supervisors (e.g., interest, motivation,
willingness to take initiative, enthusiasm, and eagerness), of supervisees
as facilitators of relationships with patients (e.g., interpersonal curiosity,
flexibility, and empathy), of supervisees as facilitators of content or theory
learning (e.g., intellectual openness, intellectual curiosity, and capacity for
conceptual abstraction), and of supervisees as facilitators of process or skills
learning (e.g., minimal defensiveness, receptivity to feedback, and tolerance
for ambiguity; Rodenhauser et al., pp. 370-371).
MEASUREMENT AND METHODOLOGIES OF
COMPETENCY ASSESSMENT
Regardless of the conceptualization of competency, as Sumerall et al.
(2000) conclude, "While there are different models that one may use, in
order to establish competency one must identify the core competency being
64 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

assessed, develop a tool for assessing the core competency, and develop a
plan to train to achieve that core competency" (p. 14). Roe (2002) suggested
construction of a competence profile for the individual, containing compe-
tences, subcompetences, knowledge, skills, attitudes, abilities, and personal-
ity traits. In this profile, competences are the higher level integrated types
of work, required, whereas knowledge, skills, and attitudes refer to more
elemental, basic components.
Assessment of competence has been described as "a moving target
with an elusive criterion" (Robiner et al., 1993, p. 5). Development of
competency-based curricula is even more difficult because of the tendency
to de-emphasize evaluation and psychodiagnostics in psychology training
(Falender, 2000), areas identified as primary deficits of internship applicants
(Lopez, Oehlert, &Moberly, 1996). Measurability, operationalization, quan-
tification, and validity are components that could reduce the elusive quality
of competency assessment.
Medicine provides us with a considerable number of ways to analyze
competencies. Reflective and philosophical approaches are considered the
oldest and are valued especially for their insights into problem-solving and
prerequisite abilities. However, they are difficult to reconcile with more
systematic research and formal approaches to competency or skill analysis. In
task-analysis approaches, the conventional methods of defining competence,
consensus is plagued by problems of sampling to ensure inclusion of a
representative group of experts. Critical-incident approaches have been used
successfully in medical clinical examinations, but do not directly lead to
adequate practice, as they focus on only the very poor or very exemplary.
Procedural logs also do not address competence of behavior; they simply
note behavior that has occurred (Norman, 1985).
There are a number of properties necessary to the measurement of
clinical competence, including face validity; comprehensiveness or content
validity; reliability, concurrent, predictive, and construct validity, eco-
nomic and time feasibility, and a match with the purpose of the measure-
ment (Neufeld, 1985). It is preferable to use multiple modalities rather than
just one technique or modality to enhance validity. Techniques vary in
terms of the subjectivity of the individual being assessed and of the evalua-
tor, depending on the content and specificity of the competencies rated
(Sumerall et al., 2000). For example, critiques of portfolios describe the time
required and lack of reliability of scoring or evaluation of each unique piece.
Reasonable reliability has been established on ratings of work samples,
especially if the supervisor and supervisee shared similar theoretical orienta-
tions (Dienst & Armstrong, 1988).
Competency of the trainee has been approached from the perspective
of analysis of current "outstanding" trainees. Peterson and Bry (1980) studied
dimensions of professional competence by having psychology faculty assign
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE 
65

characteristics to individuals they thought of as outstanding (in competence)
and those they thought of as mediocre or poor within their training program.
For the outstanding group, they obtained lists of adjectives from which
they derived four common factors: responsibility, interpersonal warmth,
intellectual acuity, and a set of qualities acquired through experience (self-
assurance, technical skill, self-sufficiency, maturity and dedication). Warmth
figured strongly in general competence ratings among supervisors who were
not behaviorally oriented, highlighting the interaction of theory and per-
ceived competence.
The role of personal attributes and their association with positive
change are often neglected in descriptions of components of competence
(Herman, 1993). Personal attributes include the ability to establish a thera-
peutic bond, which appears to be related to therapist's skill at communication
of empathy, concern, and a sense of humor. Shaw and Dodson (1988) stated
that the incoming trainee must possess certain personal traits to facilitate
his or her development as a therapist. The ideal trainee is an empathic,
caring, sensitive, and bright individual who then learns the specific compe-
tencies defined. Most training programs are skills oriented, with emphasis
on the personal aspects relegated to the trainee-selection process. Although
screening for personal attributes is reported to occur in doctoral programs,
generally it is intuitive rather than competency based, based on interviews,
letters of recommendation, or personal statements (Procidano et al, 1995).
Approaches to competency assessment in psychology can be contrasted
with those used in business management. In the latter field, executives from
a broad range of disciplines were evaluated by setting the criteria for
success and then assessing their competencies with respect to the criteria
(McClelland, 1998). Interviewees were presented with three positive and
three negative episodes and were told to respond with what they said,
thought, felt, and did in each instance. The behavior of each executive was
analyzed to distinguish between those who are outstanding in their skills
and those who are average. Competencies that distinguish these two groups
were then identified. Competencies identified that distinguish outstanding
performers included achievement orientation, analytic thinking, conceptual
thinking, flexibility, impact and influence, initiative, and self-confidence.
Each executive did not necessarily apply each competency in all situations.
The organizational climate and occupational group dictated variation in
competencies of the outstanding executives. This approach provides a frame-
work to identify competencies that supercede specific skill sets.
Moore (1984) described competencies for insurance office employees
used for self-evaluation and for supervisory evaluation both before and after
training. The competencies were problem solving and decision making,
adaptability to change, time-management capabilities, planning and organiz-
ing, creative contributions, self-management, troubleshooting, interpersonal
66 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

effectiveness, interpersonal communications, job knowledge, quality of work,
and quantity of work. Scores were used to enhance training and to monitor
those who scored poorly.
These examples provide working models of approaches to defining
qualitative competency variables that might be definitive. However, sets of
such variables would differ for different tasks, and one cannot directly
generalize from management to psychology practice.
Analyzing reports of the representation and emphasis of defined compe-
tencies in graduate curricula, Morrison, O'Connor, and Williams (1991)
found high emphasis on dynamics of therapeutic relationships, ethics in
relationships, and interviewing, and slightly lower emphasis on culture-
sensitive approaches. They also found high emphasis on intelligence testing,
objective personality assessment, and child assessment. A very low emphasis
was placed on techniques of supervision and administrative issues, and a
medium emphasis on legal, ethical, and professional standards of practice.
Thus, training does not always reflect what has been defined as aspirational
competencies.
COMPETENCY OF THE PSYCHOLOGY TRAINEE
We are concerned with measuring the competency of the supervisee
in two core contexts: (a) the skills the trainee possesses on entering the
training sequence and (b) the skills deemed essential for successful comple-
tion of the training program. The first step is to define the competencies
in both contexts—that is, to define what the trainee should know on
entering the training sequence and what he or she needs to be able to do
on completion of the training. The second step is to develop a methodology
to measure the competencies. Then the curriculum must be altered to teach
the competencies to be measured (McCann et al., 1998). However, training
staffs have found development of competency-based evaluation extremely
difficult and time consuming. One approach requires breaking down the
training sequence into series of competency statements as objectives and
then analyzing the component parts of those objectives. In the case of
manualized treatments, competence is defined in terms of adherence or
conformity to the precise steps and procedures included in the manual
(Lambert & Ogles, 1997).
One approach to analyzing competencies has been to assess particular
component parts. It is extremely important to determine the skills and
competencies defining the adequately functioning supervisee. Supervisee
competencies and goals vary as a function of developmental level. For
example, first-year practicum trainees may have skill levels and correspond-
ing goals that are concrete and specific, related to conceptualization of the
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE 
67

client's problem, the treatment plan for the problem, and goals for the client
(Talen & Schindler, 1993). In fact, establishment of goals can serve as a
basis for a secure foundation for the supervisee-supervisor relationship and
can facilitate the evaluation process (see chap. 8, this volume). Competen-
cies may be profession specific or setting specific. For example, assessment
as a competency itself would apply to psychology trainees in general, but types
of assessment competencies required (e.g., neuropsychology, personality, or
developmental) would depend on the setting.
A methodology for the integration of competency into the curriculum
consists of (a) a ratings form with pretraining, midtraining, and posttraining,
evaluations of each defined competency in a self-report and a supervisor
report; (b) a training contract that lays out a formulation of all the compo-
nent parts of the required training sequence, articulating specific aspects of
all requirements and expectations for the training sequence with quantifiable
descriptors; (c) a graduate school report of competencies and areas for
which the trainee needs improvement; (d) a supervisory plan focused on
the identified competencies for which the trainee needs additional experi-
ence; (e) a formal evaluation of each of the competency components in an
integrated format at a minimum of three or four points during the training
year, culminating in the summative evaluation; and (f) a formative evalua-
tion referring to particular highlighted competencies or areas as well as
general areas that arise in supervision. The summative evaluation focused
on completion of criteria of completion.
The initial assessment of the trainee may be conducted through a
rating scale, completed by the trainee (self-assessment) and then by the
supervisor. In the self-assessment, the trainee rates him- or herself on a
variety of modalities, experiences, and competencies that correspond to
those considered essential to the program in which the training occurs. Skill
at self-assessment is an important competency for both supervisees and
supervisors as movement toward enhanced self-awareness. An example of
the pre-training assessment for a child, adolescent, or family internship is
presented in Exhibit 3.1. Alternatively, the evaluation form to be used
during the training year may be completed as a pre-training assessment prior
to the beginning of the training. Then, as stated previously, the second step
of this process is to develop a supervision contract or agreement in which
specific areas are identified for progress and the expectations of the training
site are clearly articulated.
Each item with a "2" or "3" rating is prioritized into a supervisory plan,
with a specific methodology for enhancing skills for that item. Within each
specific area, supervisors and supervisees must develop a more refined set
of competencies. It is desirable to assess each trainee in each area of relevant
experience, including proposed interventions to be used and areas of exper-
tise. To assess the developmental level of the trainee, a multiphase process
68 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

EXHIBIT 3.1
Competency Rating Form Trainee Self-Rating
Ratings: 
1 
I am competent
2 
I need improvement or
assistance
3 
I have had no experience
Plan: a. Supervision
b. Video/Audio Tape
and Review
c. Case Presentation
d. Other (specify)
Demonstrates Competency
in the following technical
skills:
Self-Rating:
Theoretical and Practice
Orientations:
Specify models:
Psychodynamic
Cognitive Behavioral
Family Systems
Solution-focused
Crisis Model
Other (Specify)
Specific Play Therapy
Temporal Orientation:
Brief Treatment
Extended Treatment
Modality:
Group
Individual
Family
Client Populations:
Developmental
Considerations:
Infant
Preschool
Elementary school-latency
Middle school
High School-Adolescents
Transitional Youth
Other
Client Populations:
Diversity Considerations:
Culture
Ethnicity
Gender
Sexual Orientation
Start
9/
6 months
3/
Final
8/
Comments/
Methodology
(continued)
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE
69

EXHIBIT 3.1
Competency Rating Form Trainee Self-Rating (continued)
Ratings: 
1 
I am competent
2 
I need improvement or
assistance
3 
I have had no experience
Plan: a. Supervision
b. Video/Audio Tape
and Review
c. Case Presentation
d. Other (specify)
Demonstrates Competency
in the following technical
skills:
Self-Rating:
Theoretical and Practice
Orientations:
Specify models:
Client Populations:
Diversity Considerations:
(continued)
Disability
Deaf/Hard of Hearing
Other (specify)
Psychodiagnostics/
Assessment:
List all measures to be
used in training year in
personality, intellectual,
neuropsychology and
education and rate each on
separate piece of paper
Additional Clinical Skills:
Consultation (specify):
Program Evaluation
Case Management
Other
Therapeutic/Team Skills:
Teamwork
Therapeutic Alliance
Data Gathering
Diagnostic-Analytic
Co-Therapy
Other
Start
9/
6 months
3/
Final
8/
Comments/
Methodology
Supervisor Comments:
The form may be modified with additional columns for supervisors to rate each of
these areas of the trainee at each time period as well, either agreeing or not with the
trainee self-assessment.
Note that this form is program-specific and can be modified to fit the specifics of an
individual program.
70
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

EXHIBIT 3.2
Sample Assessment of Child, Family, and Supervision Experience
Child experience
• Children—ages and developmental levels
• Valence of relating to children
• Child development research exposure
• Developmental continua, milestones, and course of development
• Specialization with one level (e.g., adolescence)
• Comfort with children of varying or certain ages
• Ease in communicating with children or adolescents
• Maintenance of objectivity in work with children or adolescents
• Internalized knowledge of development (e.g., what is developmentally
appropriate; what is discrepant)
• Attitude towards change in children (theoretical model and implementation)
• Use of play (models, theories, cases)
• Comfort with cultural and gender variables in interaction
• Exposure to presenting problems of a wide range
• Reaction to new situations (e.g., presenting problems; child behavior)
Family experience
• Own personal experience within a family
• Exposure to family-therapy training theories (be specific)
• Particular model expertise
• Observation (live) of clinical experience
• Integration of child into family conceptualization (experience and specific
evidence of such conceptual integration)
• Ease in relating to various family members
Supervision experience
• Positive, negative, or mixed
• Identification of at least one positive role model
• Live
• Use of audio- or videotape; frequency of taping
• Comfort in supervision
• Attitude towards supervision process
• Attitude towards supervisor
• Theoretical model(s) used
• Gender or diversity factors of previous supervisors
is used. Performance levels of trainees are ascertained on a wide range of
tasks. The program may develop self- and supervisory rating scales, with
each clinical task broken into as many component parts as the trainees and
training team can develop. One may use a Likert rating scale, usually with
three points.
We superimpose on this model a conceptualization of the population
to be served. If it is families, for example, we must take into account a
whole dimension of theoretical and pragmatic knowledge, comfort, ease,
and experience associated with that constellation. (See Exhibit 3.2 for a
sample assessment of child, family, and associated supervision experiences.)
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE 
71

In addition, there is the question of skill overlay. For example, the supervisee
may be highly trained in play therapy and in family therapy, but not in
family therapy with young children in the family constellation.
SUPERVISORY GOALS
Whether in the context of a remediation plan or in the course of
ongoing supervision, the supervisor should have a supervision plan, relating
to the assessed competencies, developmental level of the trainee, and desig-
nated goals, linked to the supervisory contract. In the case of remediation,
the supervisee will have been identified through previous assessments or
write-ups to have a specific area of deficit. The plan would be centered
around specific experiences to address that area. To develop such a plan,
observable goals are identified, with action steps to reach the goals. For
example, if increasing competence with preschool-age children with behav-
ioral disorders was the goal, a series of steps could be developed, such as
coleading a preschool group, being assigned a family with a child that age
and presenting problems, and reading appropriate literature and treatment
manuals on interventions for that population. If the supervisor and trainee
focused on instances of identification of emotional expression in the session,
the supervisor might review tapes of sessions with the trainee and assist in
identifying emotions that went unrecognized during the course of the session.
An action plan would then be developed in which the supervisor would
assist the trainee in identifying his or her own feeling states in the session
and then focus as well on identifying those of the client. Ways to recognize
evidence that the goal has been reached would be articulated in the plan.
COMPETENCY OF THE PSYCHOLOGY SUPERVISOR
Unfortunately, although our pedagogy devotes substantial effort in the
form of graduate training, practicum, internship, postdoctoral work, and
supervised experience to provide psychologists with basic competence, there
has been remarkable neglect of the development process and evaluation of
supervisor competence (Association of State and Provincial Psychology
Boards, Task Force on Supervision Guidelines, 1998). It has been assumed
that any adequate clinician can be an adequate supervisor, that one learns
supervision skills from one's own supervisors, and that one can simply learn
by doing. However, these alternatives have been discounted, and as a result
supervision training is "in need of a systematic, guiding ethos and should
not be allowed to languish in its current state of benign neglect" (Watkins,
1992, p. 147). A study of supervision training in graduate curricula (Scott
72 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

et al., 2000) revealed wide variability in the availability of supervision train-
ing. A didactic course in supervision was reported to be offered (but not
necessarily required) in 85% of the graduate counseling programs surveyed,
but only 34% of the clinical programs (48% return rate). Seventy-nine
percent of counseling programs offered supervision practicum, whereas only
34% of clinical programs did so. Finally, in programs in which supervision
was taught, respondents in clinical psychology programs were more likely
to report a dearth of formal or informal methods of supervision proficiency
evaluation than were counseling students (Scott et al.). At the internship
level, didactic seminars were offered in 39% of the programs. Among those
programs not offering training in supervision (94 out of the 209 surveys
returned), the reason cited was that schedules were too heavy or there was
no appropriate population to supervise (Scott et al.). McCarthy et al. (1988)
summarized that it is a myth that individuals do not need training in order
to supervise.
Becoming a supervisor requires a significant transition from being
a clinician. The technical competency required for being a supervisor is
multifaceted, as it encompasses skills in multiple clinical areas, and depth in
several of these areas. These skills include general experience in supervision;
education and skills in the diversity components of the population of the
trainee and the client; competence in a whole domain of supervision skills,
including trainee assessment, educational planning and intervention, laws
and ethics, and evaluation; and facility in establishing the supervisory rela-
tionship or alliance. Many of these skills are not systematically incorporated
in graduate or internship training. As a result, licensure in psychology is
not synonymous with competency in supervision, even though in many
states it is the requirement for beginning supervision.
Cobia and Boes (2000) outlined a few requirements of supervisory
competence:
• to be competent in the areas of the supervisee's practice;
• to limit supervision to those areas in which one has had suffi-
cient training, supervised experience, or both; and
• not to provide supervision in areas in which one is not entitled
to practice.
Nelson et al. (2001) defined two fundamental measurable supervision
competencies: the ability to establish strong alliances with supervisees and
the ability to manage interpersonal conflicts in supervision.
At the Competencies Conference sponsored by the Association of
Psychology Postdoctoral and Internship Centers (APPIC, 2002), the
workgroup on supervision proposed the following supraordinate factors of
supervision competency: recognition that attaining supervision competen-
cies is a lifelong, cumulative developmental process with proficiency levels
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE 
73

beyond mere competence; attention to all forms of diversity; attention to
legal and ethical issues influenced by professional and personal factors such
as values, beliefs, biases, and conflicts; and necessity of peer assessment and
self-assessment across all levels of development (Falender et al., in press).
The ACES Standards for Counseling Supervisors defined 11 core char-
acteristics of effective supervisors that provide structure for conceptualizing
supervisory competency (Association for Counselor Education and Supervi-
sion, 1990). The core characteristics are being an effective counselor first;
demonstrating particular traits and characteristics; and being knowledgeable
about legal and ethical considerations, the supervisory relationship, methods
and techniques of supervision, the developmental process, case conceptual-
ization, assessment and evaluation, record keeping and report writing, evalua-
tion, and supervision research.
The benefit of this outline of traits, knowledge, and competencies is
the specificity of description. One could transform this outline into a ratings
form that can be individualized to particular settings for assessment of
supervisory competence. However, we would encourage the addition of some
more interactive criteria into the ratings so that the form is reflective of
the reciprocal process of the evolution of training.
Recall that from the developmental perspective, the beginning trainee
may be self-absorbed, and the process is one of movement toward attending
to the client and his or her milieu. Relevant to the developmental perspective
is the controversy over whether supervision should be taught during graduate
training, internship, or should be reserved for postdoctoral training. Propo-
nents emphasize the necessity for didactic training, which logically places
supervision in the graduate curriculum. They also contend that there is
greater understanding and empathy between trainees of similar age, as the
trainees have shared similar recent experiences, making the more advanced
graduate student an ideal supervisor. Opponents argue that to supervise
novices, one must have considerably consolidated clinical skills and general
competencies (multicultural, legal and ethical, etc.), as effective supervision
requires substantial levels of planning, conceptualization, maturity, and low-
ered anxiety. Stoltenberg, McNeill, and Delworth (1998) advocated the
training of Level 2 supervisors to supervise Level 1 therapists. They say,
"While the struggling Level 2 supervisor is a difficult match for any super-
visee, the best assignment is with a Level 1 therapist, as this individual
tends to elicit a protective, nurturing stance that results in more consistent
behavior by the supervisor" (Stoltenberg, McNeill, & Delworth, p. 163).
They cautioned that a therapist cannot supervise in an area in which he
or she is just learning clinically, saying it would be "analogous to a Little
League baseball player's coaching in the major leagues" (p. 159). We suggest
that the complexity of supervision of a novice therapist is great.
74 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

SELF-ASSESSMENT
The half-life of the knowledge of a psychology doctorate is only 10
to 12 years (Dubin, 1972). That is, half of what one learned in graduate
school becomes obsolete within 12 years, making ongoing assessment of
one's competence and continuing education obligatory. However, the ease
of learning new areas in graduate school is not replicated in the world
beyond one's doctoral education. Ultimately, once a psychologist is licensed,
much of the assessment of his or her competency is self-assessment (Shaw
& Dodson, 1988). That is, the practitioner or supervisor makes judgments
regarding his or her own areas of competency and performance. Unfortu-
nately, we have received little preparation to judge ourselves. Belar et al.
(2001) described a model for self-assessment that a practitioner can use to
gauge his or her readiness to begin new forms of practice. It contains a
template that is specific to delivery of services to patients with medical-
surgical problems but that could be adapted to other areas as well. The steps
in Belar et al.'s model include organizing a sequential set of competencies
with reference to current research; consulting with relevant professional
peers, colleagues, or other professionals; identifying a mentor; identifying
a stepwise progression of experiential components; and creating a peer-
learning group around the particular area.
The model introduced by Belar et al. (2001) is excellent for instilling
principles of self-evaluation in supervisees. Belar et al. advocate implementa-
tion of structured sequential learning experiences to assist professionals in
expanding their scope of practice and building on existing competencies.
They urge integration of continuing education into a systematic, planned
sequence designed to cement competencies rather than engaging in random
single continuing-education courses.
Borders and Leddick (1987) developed a self-assessment of supervision-
related knowledge and skills (see Appendix G). Specific items in teaching
style that relate to the trainee, the conducting of clinical sessions, consulting,
and the application of research skills to clinical practice and evaluation are
clearly spelled out. In their Competencies of Supervisors scale, subscales for
conceptualization and knowledge of therapy skills and supervision, program
management, intervention skills, and interactional skills as a supervisor are
articulated. The scale may be used as a self-evaluation for supervisors or as
an evaluation to be completed by supervisees.
It is important to differentiate self-assessment, a more global approach,
from self-monitoring. Self-assessment refers to a more global judgment based
on previous experience and education, whereas self-monitoring is an ongoing
process noted by management consultants to be a significant factor in
competence. Cone (2001) described two actions that define self-monitoring:
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE 
75

identifying a behavior and recording its occurrence. This technique is viewed
as very useful for intervention targeting particular specific behaviors but
problematic as an assessment technique (Cone, 2001) because it typically
focuses on only a particular, very finite behavior. Self-monitoring can be
useful as a first step in determining parameters and areas to address in a
self-assessment plan.
ASSESSING COMPETENCY OF THE SUPERVISOR
Although supervisor competency is not usually formally assessed in
training situations (Sumerall et al., 2000), it is desirable and assumed to
exist. Very few programs conduct formal assessments apart from agency-
administered annual employee evaluations linked to salary changes or from
feedback given by trainees on their perceptions of the supervision or the
training experience.
TRANSITION FROM CLINICIAN TO SUPERVISOR
The transition to the supervisory role and the complexity of the compe-
tencies of that role require special attention. The transition from therapist
to supervisor has been a neglected area. There are two models that address
this progression: that of Cormier and Bernard (1982) and that of Borders
(1992). Cormier and Bernard (1982) applied the Discrimination Model
(J. M. Bernard, 1997) to this progression. They urged the identification of
baseline supervisory behaviors, or idiosyncratic ways of observing, processing,
and communicating. Several particular roles of the supervisor could be
favored over others in the process of becoming a supervisor. They recom-
mended that the roles of teacher, consultant, and counselor be monitored,
as excesses in any of these roles would result in anomalous supervision.
Borders (1992) described the cognitive shift that is required to transi-
tion from clinician to supervisor. In doing so, she described a number of
possible stances of varying effectiveness. First is the view of the supervisee
as a surrogate for the supervisor-clinician. In this mode, the supervisor is
performing as a clinician, making thorough, copious notes about the client
while reviewing tapes, generating hypotheses about dynamics, and devising
plans for working with the client. The emphasis is on the client, to the
exclusion of the supervisee's reactions or questions, resulting in the super-
visee feeling disempowered and overwhelmed, not understanding the direc-
tives of the supervisor, as they are not grounded in conceptualization or
theory.
76 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION
