The second stance is that of the supervisee as the client. The supervisor
focuses on the supervisees' personal issues, assuming that the supervisee's
dynamics are the sole reason for shortcomings in performance. A supervisor's
inadequate assessment leads to his or her not differentiating what skills the
supervisee actually has, as opposed to skills the supervisee may be afraid of
or unsure of using.
The third position, and the goal in the progression, is to be a supervisor
who thinks of supervisees as learners and him- or herself as an educator.
This perspective involves strategizing to help the supervisee be more effective
with the client, with priority given to learning the supervisee's needs and
meeting those needs. In this mode, the supervisor and supervisee take a
proactive stance within a discovery learning process, but keep client welfare
tantamount in their consideration. We posit a higher level of supervisor
development in which the supervisor is coordinator of a bidirectional process
in which he or she influences and is influenced by supervisee behavior. This
process is similar to the narrative-supervision process described by Bob
(1999) in which supervision is a dialogue that explores the constructed
realities of client, supervisee, and supervisor.
To effectively progress as a supervisor, Borders (1992) proposes review
of session videotapes, advance planning of supervisory sessions, use of super-
visory case notes to link goals to events and successful execution, live
observation and supervision, Interpersonal Process Recall (Kagan & Kagan,
1997), peer review, and modeling of effective supervision.
Training Models
Several models have been proposed for training supervisors (J. M.
Bernard & Goodyear, 1998; Borders et al., 1991; Getz, 1999; Powell, Leyden,
& Osborne, 1990). The types of training programs include skill-development,
personal-growth, and integration programs. In skill-development programs,
the supervisor enhances the supervisee's conceptual and other skills through
teaching and helping the supervisee approach the task of helping the client.
In the personal-growth model, emphasis is on enhancing insight, perspective,
and sensitivity of the supervisee through focusing on the supervisee's personal
responses to the client. The integration model aids in integration of skills
and personal awareness in relating to the client (Hart as cited in Getz,
1999). J. M. Bernard and Goodyear (1998) advocated both didactic and
experiential training components.
Models of supervision have proposed primary supervisory roles of
teacher; counselor; consultant (Ellis & Dell, 1986); facilitator; administrator
(J. M. Bernard & Goodyear, 1998); and monitor—evaluator, instructor-
advisor, model, supporter-sharer, and consultant (Holloway, 1999). Taibbi
(1995) described a progression from supervisor as teacher, guide, gatekeeper,
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE 
77

and then consultant. Carroll (1999) suggests seven elements of supervisory
roles or tasks: the relationship task, the teaching/learning task, the counseling
task, the monitoring task, the evaluation task, the consultation task, and
the administrative task. A combination of the conceptions of Holloway and
Carroll provides us with a comprehensive view. Supervision is a multilevel,
multirole model, encompassing each of the previously mentioned dimensions
except therapist or counselor. A model that combines Holloway and Carroll's
conceptions would entail the following elements of the supervisory role:
creating a forum of reflection (consulting); mentoring (modeling, supporting,
and sharing); building an apprenticeship (monitoring, evaluating, and advis-
ing); connecting supervision to education; weaving a tapestry of theory
and intervention (instructing); incorporating awareness of developmental
models of supervision; enhancing awareness of the social role models of
supervision as revolving around the roles and tasks in which supervisor
and supervisee involve themselves (modeling); and integrating diversity,
context, and legal and ethical considerations.
J. M. Bernard and Goodyear (1998) provided an outline for Bernard's
structured workshop in supervision. She uses a variety of meta- and experien-
tial activities to train novices in supervision. In the laboratory, she has the
trainees observe videos of client therapy sessions and play the role of supervi-
sor, taking notes to give to their "supervisee," who is conducting the therapy
session, and organizing the content of the supervisory hour. She categorized
the activities into the following groups, using J. M. Bernard's (1997) dis-
crimination model: foci of intervention, conceptualization, and personaliza-
tion with the supervisor acting as teacher, counselor, or consultant. By
superimposing a developmental framework on their supervision plans,
Bernard focuses on the aptness of their proposed interventions. Next the
supervisors-in-training role-play dyads in which one member is the observed
trainee from the previous session and the other is the supervisor. Then the
members reverse roles for another situation, audiotaping all supervision
sessions for review. The training progresses through six more sessions. The
Discrimination Model, Interpersonal Process Recall (IPR), Microtraining,
live supervision, evaluation, and ethical and legal issues are the topics of
the sessions. Innovative use of video, vignettes, and role-play punctuates
the training. This outline appears to be an exceptional introduction to
models and pivotal issues in supervision.
Borders et al. (1991) proposed a curriculum centered on themes of self-
awareness, theoretical and conceptual knowledge, and skills and techniques.
Seven curricular areas were identified: models; supervisee development;
methods and techniques; the supervisory relationship; ethical, legal, and
professional regulatory issues; evaluation; and administrative skills. The
inclusion of self-awareness is a significant strength of this proposed curricu-
lum, as it gives the beginning supervisor a chance to fully integrate his or
78 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

her existing practices and beliefs into the curriculum described. The curricu-
lum also integrates the developmental process of becoming a supervisor,
including dealing with anxiety and personal issues. However, the curriculum
only indirectly approaches cultural and diversity competency. A complete
outline of the curriculum is presented in Borders et al.'s (1991) article.
However, the model is very complex (Russell & Petrie, 1994).
Powell et al. (1990) suggested a different approach. Through task analy-
sis, they developed a core curriculum that addresses process issues in negotia-
tion with supervisees, through use of a "win-win" paradigm, giving and
receiving feedback, assessing trainee work, and dealing with difficult issues
within supervision, including establishment of trust, boundaries, interper-
sonal issues, and unsatisfactory work. Although this approach is very different
from that of Borders et al. (1991), there is substantial overlap between
the two.
Another approach involves supervision, usually group, of beginning
supervisors by a seasoned therapist. In this approach, the supervisor-in-
training presents material, eventually videotaped, on the supervisory session
with the supervisee. The process of the supervision focuses on the juxtaposi-
tion of knowledge of the supervisor-in-training's level of development with
that of the supervisee and on helping the supervisor-in-training to progress
in confidence, flexibility, and anxiety reduction.
An alternative approach is training novice supervisors by conducting
group supervision. An analysis of recurrent factors arising for novice supervi-
sors in group supervision (Ellis & Douce, 1994) revealed supervisor anxiety,
difficulty in intervention choice, dynamics of group cohesion (competition
vs. support), responsibility (tension between client welfare and supervisee
growth), parallel process, power struggles, individual differences, and sexual
attraction. Each of these factors is highlighted in terms of the personal
contribution of the supervisor to the process, a valuable lesson for the
novice.
A manualized approach to supervision by Neufeldt (1999a, 1999b)
provides a structure for the novice supervisor to approach practicum students.
It balances the psychoemotional components of support with challenge
to develop supervisee reflective inquiry with week-by-week examples of
supervisory interaction and development.
Supervisors functioning within manualized treatment protocols may
include manualized supervision as well (Henggeler & Schoenwald, 1998).
This articulated approach may be highly beneficial for enhancing therapist
and supervisor compliance with the particular treatment protocol. Heng-
geler, Schoenwald, Liao, Letourneau, and Edwards (2002) studied whether
aspects of their multisystemic therapy quality-assurance system contributed
to treatment fidelity by focusing on "supervisory practices which are assumed
to be the most proximal and significant contribution to therapist adherence"
BUILDING TECHNICAL COMPETENCE 
79

(p. 156). They found supervisor expertise in empirically supported treatment
was positively associated with collaboration of the therapist and family.
In the context of personal factors, countertransference, the supervisory
alliance, and ruptures to this alliance, the progression of becoming a super-
visor is exceedingly complex. The supervisor of novice supervisors has
a multilevel task of interfacing interactions between client and trainee-
therapist, trainee-therapist and supervisor-in-training, and supervisor-in-
training and supervisor, and of elaborating on the layers of process and
content with the overlays of integrity-in-relationship, ethical values-based
practice, and appreciation of diversity. Formative and ultimately summative
evaluation must be interwoven into these responsibilities as well. Although
there are numerous approaches to assist supervisors in their development,
we are hopeful that more attention and research will be devoted to this
pivotal area.
Competencies
• Vision to establish competencies corresponding to the setting and agenda of
the training
• Technical skills to define and articulate component parts of tasks and
responsibilities within the training sequence
• Ability to interweave established competencies with goals and assessed skills
of trainees
80 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

4
ADDRESSING PERSONAL FACTORS
IN SUPERVISION
It is commonly acknowledged that clinicians draw on both personal
and professional sources in their conduct of psychological treatment and
that the values they derive from these sources "become so intertwined
that it is virtually impossible to differentiate among them" (Beutler,
Machado, & Neufeldt, 1994, p. 244). It is therefore essential for clinicians
to develop an understanding of all the influences, from conscious beliefs
and culturally embedded values to unresolved conflicts at the margin of
awareness, that contribute to clinical practice. One aim of supervision
is therefore to assist the supervisee to become increasingly mindful that
the process of psychotherapy is a value-laden enterprise and that both
personal values and beliefs about human nature are infused in the theories
and techniques that guide the therapeutic process. Supervision practice
itself is equally subject to personal influence, and supervisors must develop
awareness of the beliefs, values, and dispositions that inevitably influence
their conduct. This chapter broadly discusses the appearance of personal
influence and values in the therapeutic and supervisory relationships;
contemporary considerations of countertransference, including enactment
and parallel process; and approaches to the supervisory aspects of personal
factors and self-disclosure.
81

VALUES AND PSYCHOTHERAPY
The assumption that the provision of psychological treatment, particu-
larly psychotherapy, is value neutral is no longer tenable. The postmodern
critique leads to the awareness that all perceptions, conceptions, and actions
are constructed within culturally derived spheres of meaning. Perception
and knowledge are not so much outcomes of objective observation, but
rather are the culturally embedded constructions of meaning (Lyotard, 1984;
Rorty, 1991; Rosenau, 1992). Clinical theories necessarily include perspec-
tives on human nature, and some suggest that they "are modern forms of
religious thinking in so far as they attempt to answer our insecurities, give
us generalized images of the world, and form the attitudes we should take
toward the value of life, the nature of death, and the grounds for morality"
(Browning, 1987, p. 120; see also Jones, 1994). Our efforts to understand
and help other human beings are a function of our entire web of belief, in
which our beliefs qua clinical psychologists cannot be firmly separated from
all our other beliefs (cf. O'Donohue, 1989, p. 1466; see also Jones, 1994).
This caveat to the assumption of neutrality is particular important because
psychotherapy may be seen as a process of behavior change that necessarily
involves the reordering of beliefs and values within an implicit moral frame-
work (Prilleltensky, 1997). Psychotherapists enter the assumptive worlds of
their clients and attempt, through implicit and explicit persuasion, to pro-
duce changes in the ways in which clients view themselves, the world in
which they live, and the behaviors that they enact (Frank & Frank, 1961/
1991; London, 1964). Therapeutic action often, if not always, involves a
conversion of values in which the orienting system of the psychotherapist
shapes the client's meanings and behaviors (Kelly, 1990). Beyond the sway
of contemporary philosophical and theoretical inquiry, empirical evidence
supports the proposition that personal as well as professional values influence
the conduct of psychological treatment (Beutler, 1981; Tjeltveit, 1986) and
may contribute significantly to its effectiveness (Beutler, 1979). Clinicians
and supervisors therefore need to take into consideration the role of personal
influence in their practices.
COUNTERTRANSFERENCE
Countertransference is the term that has been broadly applied to the
personal reactions of the psychotherapist, which potentially influence the
treatment. Beginning with Freud (1912), concern has been consistently
raised about the exercise of undue personal influence on the client, and the
effect of the clinician's subjectivity on the therapeutic process. Sources of
such influence include transference reactions (Freud, 1910), projections of
82 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

the client (Heitnann, 1950), identifications with the client and others
(Racker, 1953), products of the intersubjective nature of the relationship
between the client and the psychotherapist (Natterson, 1991), and, in sum,
all of the personal beliefs and values of the therapist. From this comprehen-
sive perspective, we suggest that therapists do not possess the means of
understanding their clients beyond their own emotionally colored percep-
tions and responses to their clients, many of which are outside of their
immediate awareness (cf. Ogden, 1988, p. 22). These perceptions and re-
sponses play a crucial role in the therapeutic process either by providing
subjective clinical data that enable the therapist to better understand the
client and process or by hindering the process because of the limitations
imposed by the clinician's unresolved resistances and complexes (Freud,
1910, p. 145).
Although countertransference was viewed as a source of considerable
difficulty, an assumption was fostered that the psychotherapist could be
educated to subordinate personal reactions through the process of clinical
training, together with psychotherapy, and would therefore be able to assume
a therapeutically useful stance of objectivity and to provide technical neutral-
ity. Other forms of psychotherapy, particularly existential-humanistic and
experiential approaches, emphasized the positive role that a clinician's genu-
ineness, authentic self-expression, and disciplined self-disclosure could make
to facilitate a therapeutic process (Bugental, 1965; Mahrer, 1996; Rogers,
1951; Schneider, Bugental, & Pierson, 2001). Despite significant differences
in clinical theory and approach, each variant of psychotherapy has recognized
the potential dangers associated with a therapist's acting out of personal
reactions and the necessity for developing awareness and discipline in ad-
dressing countertransference.
Contemporary clinical scholarship incorporating a postmodern episte-
mologic stance (e.g., Neimeyer &. Mahoney, 1995; Stolorow, Atwood, &
Orange, 2002) has called into question the notion of neutrality and value-
free objectivity. Indeed, countertransference may be an inevitable feature
of any human engagement, including the applied practice of psychology.
We find that the clinician's or supervisor's understanding of clients or
supervisees, respectively, is always perspectival—that is, bears the inescapable
influence of personal interests, commitments, and the cultures out of which
personal meaning is constructed (Fischer, 1998; Gergen, 1994; Giorgi, 1970;
Polkinghorne, 1988; C. Taylor, 1989). Nevertheless, some advocate that
attitudinal neutrality (Poland, 1984) can be attained whereby respect for
the client's "essential otherness" (p. 285), open-mindedness (Franklin,
1990), and rights to hold autonomous personal beliefs and values are unique
clinical features (Shapiro, 1984). Others point to the "irreducible subjectiv-
ity" (Renik, 1993) of the clinician, consider personal influence to be at the
"heart of technique" (Renik, 1996, p. 496), and describe the therapeutic
ADDRESSING PERSONAL FACTORS 
83

interaction to be mutually coconstructed (Gill, 1994; Hoffman, 1983, 1991)
and intersubjective (Atwood & Stolorow, 1984).
Our view of the role of personal factors in therapeutic and supervisory
relationships is in keeping with Dunn's (1995) view of intersubjectivity:
"[T]he very formation of the therapeutic [and supervisory] process is derived
from an inexplicably intertwined mixture of the clinical [and supervisory]
participants' subjective reactions to one another. Knowledge of the patient's
[and supervisee's] psychology is considered contextual and idiosyncratic to the
particular clinical [supervisory] interaction" (p. 723, emphasis in original).
Beyond our ongoing acknowledgment and interest in the intersubjective
nature of the therapeutic and supervisory relationships, we recognize that
there are particular instances in which countertransference, in the forms of
enactments and parallel processes, poses particular challenges and threaten
the viability of the therapeutic and supervisory working alliances.
Enactments occur in which both parties participate in a comple-
mentary fashion, often reflecting a convergence of their individual psycho-
logical conflicts (Chused, 1991; Hirsch, 1998; Jacobs, 1986; Johan, 1992;
McLaughlin, 1987, 1991; Roughton, 1993). They are by definition Co-
constructed and serve both individual and shared motivations of the client
and clinician, supervisee and supervisor. Such instances provide opportuni-
ties, by virtue of the in vivo nature involved, to gain insight into the
problematic ways in which the client or supervisee (as well as the therapist
or supervisor) consciously and unconsciously organizes relationships; indeed,
"perhaps some form of enactment is a necessary precursor to insight" (Tyson
& Renik, 1986, p. 706). Both parties are not only drawn into enactments, but
also initiate and coconstruct the enactments through their own subjective
influences. Countertransference enactments, in light of the intersubjective
nature of the interaction, are far more common and perhaps even inevitable.
The therapeutic and supervisory goals are not the elimination of counter-
transference, an impossible objective even if valued, but rather to bring
countertransference into the service of these professional relationships.
Countertransference enactments can also simultaneously occur within
the supervisory and therapeutic relationships in the form of a parallel process.
Parallel process was originally conceptualized to be the result of the therapist
unconsciously identifying with an aspect of the client and then enacting
the client's dynamics with the supervisor (Arlow, 1963). From relational
and intersubjective perspectives, "it is suggested that a parallel process can
begin with the patient, supervisee, or supervisor; involve the other dyadic
partner first in an intradyadic relational pattern; then, 'carried' by the analyst/
supervisee, influence the second dyad to enact a related transference—
countertransference matrix" (Frawley-O'Dea & Sarnat, 2001, p. 172). No
matter the nature of their origins, parallel processes hold the potential to
sweep all of the participants into a counterproductive cycle of enactments,
84 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

straining both the therapeutic and supervisory alliances. Supervisors and
supervisees therefore need to be mindful of the expression of transference—
countertransference dynamics within the interpersonal exchanges and ac-
tions occurring within the clinical and supervisory relationships.
In the case of parallel process, countertransference enactments, within
the treatment or supervision relationship, that are not identified may result
in ruptures in the therapeutic or supervisory alliance or may unwittingly
produce iatrogenic effects through the perpetuation of maladaptive patterns
of interpersonal relating. Although few empirical studies exist, Gelso and
Hayes's review of the literature (2001) suggests that acting under the sway
of countertransference is harmful and that management of countertransfer-
ence is necessary. Additional support for this conclusion is found in a recent
empirical study of the effects of countertransference on distal outcome.
Hayes et al. (1997) found that countertransference was not successfully
managed in those cases assessed to have poor or moderate outcomes, "so
that the adverse effect on treatment results is proportionate to the amount
of [countertransference] exhibited" (p. 145). These findings, although lim-
ited by the paucity of empirical research, suggest that countertransference,
if not managed, has deleterious effects on treatment. Certainly, boundary
violations and egregious acts of professional misconduct and malfeasance
(e.g., sexual misconduct) illustrate the dangers inherent in mismanagement
of personal factors and countertransference (see chap. 7, this volume).
Supervision provides a context for examining the nature of these
subjective influences and facilitates a process in which the supervisee may
obtain insight into their subjective reactions as well as develop skills to
usefully bring countertransference into the service of the treatment. Simi-
larly, supervision in general and timely consultation by supervisors in particu-
lar provide a means to examine personal influences affecting the supervisory
relationship and, particularly in situations in which the supervisory alliance
is compromised, may assist in addressing misalliances and reestablishing a
working relationship. These aims are aspirational and are offered with the
caveat that neither the supervisee nor the supervisor will ever arrive at
complete awareness and understanding of the multiple sources and expres-
sions of personal influence. Because of the potential harm in unrecognized
countertransference reactions, particularly in relationships in which a power
discrepancy exists, competence in addressing the personal, subjective contri-
butions to the clinical and supervisory processes is tantamount.
ADDRESSING COUNTERTRANSFERENCE IN SUPERVISION
Countertransference can be viewed globally to include all personal
reactions or, from a more narrow technical perspective, to be the responses
ADDRESSING PERSONAL FACTORS 
85

of the clinician or supervisor emanating from unconscious transferences and
psychological conflicts and needs, which may subvert professional practice.
Supervisors and supervisees alike may experience conflicts concerning feel'
ings of attraction, sexual interest, rivalry, jealousy, or a lack of interest,
connection, or concern. The identification of blind spots or of repeated
interactions of boundary violations and interpersonal or affective disengage-
ment or overinvestment points to the deleterious influences of counter-
transference. Misunderstanding may arise in the conjunction of appropriate
empathy, interest, warmth, and attraction with displaced countertransfer-
ence love or in response to other personal needs or characterological conflicts
(Celenza, 1995). Further, personal reactions may suggest veiled prejudices
and biases reflecting misinformed assumptions and, at times, covert or overt
bigotry with respect to diversity—attitudes counter to the ethics of the
profession. Similar processes exist in both clinical and supervisory relation-
ships and require the supervisor to be equally self-reflective and mindful of the
subtle, yet influential, role of personal factors in the practice of supervision, as
well as in the supervisee's clinical work. Although the following discussion
focuses primarily on the supervision of clinical work, the given approaches
are readily available to supervisors conducting peer supervision and consulta-
tion as well as in facilitating self-reflection and self-monitoring of counter-
transference.
Addressing countertransference is one of the central tasks of supervision
and appears to be appreciated as such by supervisees. Yourman and Farber
(1996) reported that discussion of countertransference was positively associ-
ated with supervisee satisfaction and found that "the more frequently a
supervisor discussed countertransference, the less [was] the tendency toward
supervisee nondisclosure" (pp. 571—572). Within the theoretical and empiri-
cal literature, a number of psychological and technical competencies appear
to be elemental to the ability to manage countertransference effectively.
Gelso and Hayes (2001) identified interrelated self-insight, self-integration,
empathy, conceptualizing ability, and the ability to manage anxiety to be
factors essential to the management of countertransference. These factors
appear to be associated with ratings of excellence in therapists (Van Wagoner,
Gelso, Hayes, & Diemer, 1991), were negatively related to supervisees'
displays of countertransference behaviors (Friedman & Gelso, 2000), and
in an initial study were reported to be positively associated with clinician
and supervisor ratings of outcome (Gelso, Latts, Gomez, & Fassinger, 2002).
Supervision may be particularly well suited to increasing supervisees' concep-
tualizing abilities and to providing an encouraging environment to refine
interpersonal competencies of insight, empathy, and the containment of
anxiety.
Inquiry into the supervisee's subjective reactions is often initiated
following supervisees' reports of being frustrated, bored, distracted, confused,
86 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

or irritated; when departures from the supervisee's usual clinical conduct
and disruptions of therapeutic frame have occurred; or when the treatment
appears to be going nowhere, resulting in minimal behavior change on the
part of the client or in threats to the treatment alliance. Supervision assists
novice therapists in developing management strategies to minimize interfer-
ences stemming from countertransference (E. N. Williams, Judge, Hill, &
Hoffman, 1997; E. N. Williams, Polster, Grizzard, Rockenbaugh, & Judge,
2003). Supervisors bring countertransference into consideration when ob-
serving therapist behaviors that appear to be counterproductive, inconsistent
with the treatment goals, or suggestive of defensiveness or disengagement
on the part of the trainee. Supervisors have the advantage of observing
from a position outside of the immediate intersubjective field and may note
aspects of the process occluded from the therapist's awareness.
Exploration of countertransference is best accomplished on the
foundation of a well-established supervisory alliance in which consideration
of personal values and factors has been routinely encouraged and modeled.
The examination of personal beliefs and attitudes in the context of
countertransference complements efforts in the development of diversity
competence (see chap. 6, this volume). In such a setting, the presence
of countertransference reactions, which potentially compromise the treat-
ment, can be examined in the context of other personal and professional
influences. In addition to encouraging self-reflection, interventions address-
ing countertransference involve expanding the inquiry to elucidate associa-
tions and affective and behavioral reactions through the use of focusing
techniques. Supervisor self-disclosure may be used to model and encourage
forthrightness as well as "normalize" the process of working with counter-
transference reactions. The use of video observation can be used to
identify particular sequences of interaction in which unusual shifts in
the supervisee's demeanor, behavior, and affects occur. The supervision
should be directed to assess the impact of the countertransference on
the therapeutic alliance. In particular, in instances where a strain or
rupture in the alliance has occurred, training and supervision in the use
of metacommunication (see chap. 5, this volume) are recommended
(Safran & Muran, ZOOOa, ZOOOb, 2000c).
Of utmost importance in addressing countertransference is the mainte-
nance of the boundary between supervision and psychotherapy. Appropriate
to supervision, inquiry directs attention to the interactions and processes
specific to the supervised case, and, although personal issues of the supervisee
may surface, such material is considered in light of the case. On the other
hand, encouraging exploration of personal conflicts in supervision compro-
mises the integrity of the supervisory alliance and is of service to neither
the client nor the supervisee. In instances where countertransference is
significantly compromising the supervisee's professional development, a
ADDRESSING PERSONAL FACTORS 
87

recommendation for consultation is appropriate. Referral to a clinician
provides an additional means to ensure appropriate management in which
personal issues are addressed in private psychotherapy with a clinician not
associated with the training program and through which the effects of
countertransference on the course of treatment and the therapeutic alliance
are removed.
SELF-DISCLOSURE
Of the many ways in which personal influence is expressed, self-
disclosure is the most overt form and requires particular supervisory attention.
Disclosure by therapists is inevitable within the therapeutic discourse. In
supervision, self-disclosure explicitly serves the functions of socialization
and instruction and is integral to modeling and empathic support as re-
actions and illustrations from one's clinical work are shared. Through the
ordinary course of professional practice, clinicians and supervisors unwit-
tingly, as well as at times intentionally, reveal their personal selves. In the
selection of the content to which they attend, the observations they make,
the interventions they offer, and the manner in which they conduct them-
selves, therapists and supervisors implicitly convey their personally held
attitudes, values, and commitments. Such self-disclosures are broadly
defined as "statements that reveal something personal about therapists"
(Hill & Knox, 2001, p. 413). Explicit self-disclosures are important
events in the therapeutic and supervisory processes and may support or
compromise the treatment. Distinctions should be made between the
intentional use of self-disclosure for therapeutic or pedagogic benefit and
unintentional disclosures, which usually are expressions of countertransfer-
ence. In either instance, explicit self-disclosure is a matter to be considered
in supervision.
Intentional Self-Disclosure
The empirical literature, although somewhat limited in scope, suggests
therapist self-disclosure to be infrequent. Hill and Knox (2001) reported
that approximately 3.5% of the interventions across a number of studies
were found to involve self-disclosure (p. 414). The reasons for such disclosure
include the aims of increasing perceived similarity, modeling appropriate
behavior, fostering the therapeutic alliance, normalizing clients' experiences,
offering alternative ways of thinking and acting, and responding to clients'
requests for disclosure (Hill & Knox, 2001, p. 414; see also Strieker, 1990).
In light of clinical theory, humanistic psychologists were more likely than
psychoanalytic therapists to engage in self-disclosure. The findings of ana-
88 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

logue research with nonclients and the few existing naturalistic studies of
psychotherapy suggest that therapist self-disclosure is often perceived to be
beneficial. One exploratory clinical study found client ratings of therapist
helpfulness and levels of client involvement in the therapy process to be
positively associated with therapist self-disclosure (Hill et al., 1988); reassur-
ing self-disclosures were later identified to be more helpful than challenging
self-disclosures (Hill, Mahalik, & Thompson, 1989).
The intentional use of self-disclosure may reflect the value of genuine-
ness as found in existential-humanistic therapies, as a technical intervention
in strategic therapy, or as an integral way of participating within relational
psychoanalytic treatments. In these instances, therapist self-disclosures serve
particular functions, including providing feedback, and are offered in service
of the therapeutic process and relationship. Self-disclosure as a feature of
metacommunication provides a form of self-explanation that establishes "an
atmosphere of absolute candor" (Renik, 1995, p. 493) and prompts clinicians
to reveal their processes of knowing as well as what is known (S. Gerson,
1996, p. 642). Cooper (1998), in advocating a judicious use of self-disclosure,
goes further by stating, "There are times when we need to think aloud with
the patient" (p. 152). Such commentary can hardly be considered imper-
sonal or objective, as such disclosures reveal the means by which clinicians
organize their experiences of their clients. However, countertransference
may be revealed in the process of metacommunication, particularly when
clinicians explicitly describe the aspects of the interaction that they identi-
fied as particularly salient, and discuss the ideas that informed their under-
standing. Interpretations, observations, and even expressions of empathy
may in fact reveal as much about the therapist as they do the about client.
Hoffman (1983) concluded that the client serves as the interpreter of the
therapist's experience and further commented that, "[a]lthough counter-
transference confessions are usually ill-advised, there are times when a degree
of personal, self-revealing expressiveness is not only inescapable but desirable
[, and] . . . there are times when the only choices available . . . are a variety
of emotionally expressive responses" (p. 418; see also Aron, 1991).
Bridges (2001) reflecting the reappraisal of intentional self-disclosure,
advised therapists to "remain patient focused, rely upon the patient's re-
sources and expertise, model emotional honesty and share their view of the
clinical situation at hand" (p. 23). Hill and Knox (2001), following their
review of the empirical literature, recommended the following therapeutic
practice guidelines:
1. Therapists should generally disclose infrequently.
2. The most appropriate topic for therapist self-disclosure in-
volves professional background, whereas the least appropriate
topics include sexual practices and beliefs.
ADDRESSING PERSONAL FACTORS

3. Therapists generally use disclosures to validate reality, normal-
ize client experiences, model appropriate behavior, strengthen
the therapeutic alliance, or offer alternative ways to think
or act.
4- Therapists should generally avoid using disclosures that are
chiefly for their own needs, that remove the focus from the
client, that interfere with the flow of the session, that burden
or confuse the client, that are intrusive, that blur the bound-
aries, or that overstimulate the client.
5. Therapist self-disclosure in response to client self-disclosure
seems to be particularly effective in eliciting client disclosure.
6. Therapists should observe carefully how clients respond to
therapist disclosures, ask about client reactions, and use the
information to conceptualize the clients and decide how to
intervene next.
7. It may be especially important for therapists to disclose with
clients who have difficulty forming relationships in the thera-
peutic setting.
This discussion finds that a degree of self-disclosure will naturally occur
through the clinical process, particularly in metacommunication. Intentional
self-disclosure may be appropriate and beneficial in specific clinical situa-
tions, although therapists must take into account that "crossing the threshold
of anonymity" may powerfully affect clients (Hill & Knox, 2001, p. 416).
Bachelor and Horvath (1999), in discussing the therapeutic relationship,
concluded that "therapist self-disclosure likely contributes to the quality of
the relationship for some clients, but may be less productive with others"
(p. 143). Gabbard (2001) averred that "[s]elf-disclosure of countertransfer-
ence may be useful in some situations, but the sharing of some feelings will
overwhelm patients and burden them in a way that may be destructive to
the therapeutic process" (p. 983). Therefore, the clinical use of intentional
self-disclosure requires thoughtful and judicious application. Significant clin-
ical experience may also be required to provide a foundation on which
self-disclosure may be introduced as a technical intervention. For novice
clinicians, "thinking aloud" and the use of explicit self-disclosure are not
recommended without the close monitoring and recommendation of the
supervisor. In most instances, the issue of self-disclosure will become relevant
to supervision when the supervisee has already disclosed. Attention should be
placed on the clinical theory that informed the self-disclosure, the pressures
within both the dyad and the therapist, and the effects of the disclosure on
the therapeutic process, and the involvement of countertransference should
be considered. The intentional use of self-disclosure by the clinician to
influence the client to the benefit of the personal aims of the therapist
90 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION
