reflects a significant breach of the therapeutic alliance and of professional
ethics. Such behavior calls into question the appropriateness of the super-
visee for professional training.
In monitoring their own use of personal influence, supervisors need
to be aware of the impact that their self-disclosures have on the supervisory
process. Of particular note is whether self-disclosure by the supervisor
prompts the supervisee to engage in learning behaviors. Self-disclosure is
useful to the extent that it builds and maintains the supervisory alliance
and prompts active participation in the learning cycle (see chap. 1, this
volume). Self-disclosure that does not support such a process is counterpro-
ductive, gratuitous, and may reflect countertransference needs (e.g., to be
admired), or it may simply reflect inadequate training in supervision.
Unintentional Self-Disclosure
Nondeliberate self-disclosure reflects the role of countertransference in
the treatment and supervisory processes and may take the form of disclosing
personal facts, background, attitudes, and reactions to the client or supervisee
or of providing opinions and advice concerning relationships and situations
in which the client or supervisee is involved. The phenomenology of unin-
tentional self-disclosure reflects the "felt sense" of departing from appropriate
practice and discomfort regarding the intrusion of personal influence. The
therapist or supervisor may experience confusion, anxiety, or shame follow-
ing the disclosure. In other instances, the therapist or supervisor may be
completely unaware of the disclosure, and the occurrence may become
known only through the reactions of others or by review of the session
within the process of supervision or consultation. In either case, it is useful
to approach such self-disclosures as useful data. In supervision, it is important
to avoid critical or shame-inducing feedback. Unintentional disclosures
provide opportunities to understand the countertransference pressures within
the relationship and to mitigate undue influence. In addition to uninten-
tional disclosures, unexpected exposures of the personal life of the thera-
pist or supervisor may occur (B. Gerson, 1996; Gold & Nemiah, 1993;
Ulman, 2001). These exposures occur through discussion of unavoidable and
obvious circumstances (e.g., pregnancy, unexpected illness, and miscarriage);
through public exposure (e.g., lectures, publications, and awards), and
through the client's or supervisor's gaining information informally (e.g.,
overhearing a reference to the clinician while in the waiting room). These
exposures are not technically disclosures, because the clinician or supervisor
neither intentionally nor unintentionally, under the pressure of counter-
transference, directly self-revealed. Nevertheless, these experiences affect
the therapeutic or supervisory relationship and should be processed within
supervision. Supervision can be very beneficial in helping the supervisee
ADDRESSING PERSONAL FACTORS 
91

determine what to disclose, as well as how to address boundary setting. The
intent is neither to burden the client emotionally nor to disengage from
the client under the presumption of anonymity. Discussion of this issue
early in one's training is particularly useful in light of the inevitability of
facing such circumstances later on in one's professional career.
In light of the fact that education and training involve self-disclosure,
supervisors have a challenging task in assessing the nature of their self-
disclosures. The issue then becomes one of determining the purposes of the
self-disclosures and their effects. Whether a disclosure is intentional or
unintentional, the impact of self-disclosure on the supervisor alliance, and
ultimately on case oversight and training, requires assessment.
COMPETENCIES IN ADDRESSING PERSONAL FACTORS
IN SUPERVISION
As we have surveyed, personal influences are abundant and accompany
every technical intervention and facet of training. In many respects, it is
difficult, if not impossible, to discern the precise origins of our clinical
understanding and interventions and to discriminate between personal and
professional sources. Our interventions, whether in clinical consultation or
supervision, are to be guided by science and yet are influenced by our
humanity. Supervision therefore requires adroit attention to the confluence
of the personal and professional factors that shape the therapeutic and
supervisory discourses. The potential for misalliance based on countertrans-
ference influences exists in both relationships. In light of the importance
of maintaining integrity-in-relationship, we place particular emphasis on
the responsibility of the supervisor to be equally self-reflective and mindful
of the subtle, yet influential, role of personal factors in the practice of
supervision as well as in the supervisee's clinical work.
Supervisors are influenced by countertransference reactions to their
supervisees in a manner similar to the way in which therapists are influenced
by countertransference reactions to their clients (Teitelbaum, 1990). In
light of the asymmetry in power and status in the supervisory relationship,
the potential for abuse of countertransference by the supervisor is great.
Although limited empirical research has been conducted, Ladany, Constan-
tine, Miller, Erikson, and Muse-Burke (2000) published the findings of a
qualitative investigation of supervisor countertransference that is salient
to this discussion. Among the findings, the sources of supervisor counter-
transference included the intern's personal style, the supervisor's unresolved
personal issues, interactions between the intern and the supervisory
environment, problematic client-intern interactions, intern-supervisor
interactions, and interactions between the supervisor and the supervisory
92 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

environment (Ladany et al., 2000, pp. 106-108). The supervisors reported
experiencing a range of emotions and included situations of parallel process.
As in clinical work, commitment to self-reflection and the use of peer
supervision and consultation may enable the supervisor to become aware
of conflicts that are negatively affecting the development and maintenance
of the supervisory working alliance. A number of competencies are involved
in addressing personal factors in supervision. These are included at the end
of the chapter.
Attention to the impact of personal factors, including countertransfer-
ence, within the supervisory and clinical relationships is integral to the
competent practice of supervision. Failure to attend to countertransference
reactions or undue personal influence may result in the perversion of the
supervisory process, threatening the integrity of the relationship and compro-
mising the supervisor's ability to provide oversight of the clinical work and
effective training. We suggest that supervisees or supervisors who are unable
or unwilling to explore their personal contributions or who remain blind
to the enactments in which they participate may be unsuitable for clinical
training in psychotherapy or for providing clinical supervision.
Competencies
• An understanding of the value-based nature of clinical and supervisory
practices
« An understanding of the theoretical and empirical literature concerning
countertransference and its appearance in clinical and supervisory practices
• Interpersonal and professional skills that contribute to the establishment and
maintenance of a working supervisory alliance, including integrity, sensitivity
to diversity, empathy, warmth, clinical competence, maintenance of
professional boundaries, and management of countertransference
• Supervision behaviors that foster self-insight, self-integration, anxiety
management, empathy, and conceptualization abilities in the supervisee,
including providing information and theory on countertransference; observing
and listening for the appearance of personal influence and
countertransference and attending to these occurrences in a direct,
nonpunitive, and uncritical manner as phenomena to be examined; engaging
in open-ended inquiry; providing feedback; engaging in self-disclosure, and
engaging in modeling response to in-session countertransference
• Monitoring the supervisory, alliance and supervisor countertransference,
obtaining peer supervision and consultation as appropriate
ADDRESSING PERSONAL FACTORS 
93

5
ALLIANCE IN THERAPEUTIC AND
SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS
The therapeutic alliance has repeatedly been demonstrated to be essen-
tial to the psychotherapeutic process and is considered to be equally salient
in the supervisory relationship. This chapter presents an overview of the
empirical research on alliances, a discussion of the alliance construct, and
an approach and technique to address alliance strain and ruptures in both
therapeutic and supervisory relationships.
Meta-analyses of empirical research conducted over the past 25 years
have found the therapeutic relationship and the alliance that forms within
that relationship to be robust variables associated with treatment outcome
(Bachelor & Horvath, 1999; Horvath, 1994, 2000, 2001; Horvath & Sy-
monds, 1991; Lambert, 1982; Lambert & Barley, 2001; Lambert & Bergin,
1994; Luborsky, 1994; Martin, Garske, & Davis, 2000). Horvath (2001)
conducted a metaanalysis of 90 independent clinical investigations and
concluded, "Two decades of empirical research have consistently linked the
quality of the alliance between therapist and client with therapy outcome.
The magnitude of this relation appears to be independent of the type of
therapy and whether outcome is assessed from the perspective of the thera-
pist, client, or observer" (p. 365; see also Beutler et al, 1994, and Binder
& Strupp, 1997a). Although critics point out that the variance estimates
are modest—for example, Martin et al. (p. 27) placed their most liberal
estimate at 7% (see also Beutler & Harwood, 2002; Stevens, Hynan, &
95

Allen, 2000)—there is a common-sense appeal, based on clinical experience,
to the proposition that the quality of the therapeutic relationship signifi-
cantly influences treatment outcome and should be a focus of training
(American Psychological Association, Division 29 Task Force on Empirically
Supported Therapy Relationships, 2002, p. 5).
Bordin (1979), expanding on psychoanalytic contributions of Sterba
(1934), Zetzel (1956), and Greenson (1967), together with Rogers' (1957)
identification of the necessary and sufficient conditions for personality
change, proposed that the therapeutic alliance is an ongoing creation of
the client and the clinician and concerns three interrelated features: change
goals and tasks, bonding, and strain. The alliance forms as a result of the
client and therapist working together on change goals and therapeutic
tasks and via bonding or partner compatibility, which "grows out of their
experience of association in a shared activity [and] is likely to be expressed
and felt in terms of liking, trusting, respect for each other, and a sense of
common commitment and shared understanding in the activity" (Bordin,
1994, p. 16). Strain refers to a significant deviation in the patient's commit-
ment to the working alliance. Bordin (1979) suggested that the kinds of
problems that brought the patient to therapy will become manifest in the
treatment relationship and will become a necessary focus of the therapeutic
work. Strains that occur during the formation of the initial alliance suggest
more significant difficulties in forming relationships, whereas strains that
emerge after the alliance has been formed reflect the self-defeating propensi-
ties of the patient being repeated within the therapeutic relationship. Strains
and ruptures in the alliance are seen as normative in the therapeutic process
and provide opportunities for change. "The 'work of the alliance' becomes
the rebuilding of the damaged alliance and thus the acquisition of new ideas
about self and relationships (Bordin, 1976, 1989)" (Horvath, 1994).
Safran and Muran (1998) suggested that a broadened conceptualization
of the therapeutic alliance is particularly useful, as it "highlights that at a
fundamental level, the patient's ability to trust, hope, and have faith in the
therapist's ability to help always plays a central role in the change process"
(p. 7). They commented on four implications that are relevant to our consid-
eration of supervision and will serve as a close to our introduction of the
therapeutic alliance:
• This conceptualization of the therapeutic alliance highlights
the interdependence of relational and technical factors in psy-
chotherapy. It suggests that the meaning of any technical factor
can be understood only in the interpersonal context in which
it is applied.
• The foregoing condition provides a rational framework for guid-
ing the therapist's interventions in a flexible fashion.
96 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

• Ruptures in the therapeutic alliance are the key to understand-
ing the patient's representational world.
• Understanding patients as being diverse in capacity and variable
in experiencing highlights the importance of the negotiation
between patient and therapist about the tasks and goals of
therapy, (cf. pp. 8-9)
The factors that influence the development of the therapeutic alliance
similarly affect the formation of the supervisory working alliance. Bordin
(1983) described the supervisory version of the model, which is based on
establishment of mutually determined goals (e.g., mastering specific skills,
enlarging one's understanding of clients, and maintaining standards of ser-
vice) and the means to achieve them. As with the therapeutic relationship,
an emotional bond and alliance will form through the process of working
collaboratively toward achievement of the goals. Relational qualities are
seen by supervisees as important to the supervisory relationship and, in our
view, are particularly salient when addressing factors that are by definition
personal to the supervisee (see chap. 3, this volume). Highly rated supervisor
qualities include empathy, a nonjudgmental stance, impartment of a sense
of validation or affirmation, an attitude of acceptance, provision of encour-
agement to explore and experiment, integrity, provision of autonomy,
warmth, and an understanding nature. Ladany (2002) reported that a strong
supervisory working alliance seems to play a significant role in the supervision
process and outcome, such as when training in multicultural competence
or addressing trainee self-disclosure and non-disclosure; however, "the alli-
ance in supervision also seems to be the one thing that supervisors, particu-
larly beginning or untrained supervisors, are most apt to forget about or not
consider" (p. 15). The development of the working supervisory alliance is
a central pillar in our model and is supported by the superordinate values,
including integrity-in-relationship. We turn now to supervisory approaches
to addressing alliance strains and ruptures in both the therapeutic and
supervisory relationship.
ADDRESSING ALLIANCE ISSUES IN SUPERVISION
Alliance, as a transtheoretical or pantheoretical concept, is integral
to the outcome of psychological treatment (Safran, 1993b). It is "part of a
broader set of attitudes, values, expectations, sentiments, and interpersonal
interaction patterns that constitute the 'therapeutic' process. Patient and
therapist personality variables, as well as therapist techniques and skills (or
the lack of them), contribute to this process like tributaries contribute to
the main body of a river" (Binder & Strupp, 1997a, p. 121). Alliance is
THERAPEUTIC AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS 
97

thus a major focus of supervision, particularly with respect to personal factors,
which are posited to play a central role in its development.
Although the formation and the maintenance of the therapeutic and
supervisory alliances are coconstructed, the clinician and supervisor, respec-
tively, bear primary responsibility in facilitating their development. Personal
factors as well as professional training make up the therapist's and supervisor's
contributions to the formation of the alliance. Personal qualities of genuine-
ness, reliability, warmth, and the capacity for empathy and emotional engage-
ment support the development of the bond (Rogers, 1957). Supervisors must
attend not only to technical skills but also to enhancing the interpersonal,
signature strengths of the supervisee as well as attending to the personal
qualities that they bring to the supervisory relationship. Personal values and
attitudes derived from sociocultural or other personal influences may delimit
one's ability to understand and to empathically attune to the other's ex-
periences and worldview. Misattunement, whether based on sociocultural
insensitivity or other personal factors, may cause clients or supervisees to
experience the therapist or supervisor, respectively, as not being understand-
ing and helpful—factors that are associated with positive outcomes. This
condition is one of the reasons that building diversity competence and
attention to personal factors is fundamental to training. We turn now to a
focused discussion on supervisory approaches to assist supervisees in address-
ing alliance strains and ruptures in their clinical work.
Negative reactions to clients, as compared with other forms of personal
response or countertransference, pose a particular challenge, especially when
encountered early in treatment. Such experiences, although potentially
providing an important source of information about the client, the thera-
peutic relationship, or the supervisee's attitudes, endanger the development
of an adequate working alliance. The sources of these negative reactions
may originate in personality variables of the client and clinician (Sexton,
Hembre, & Kvarme, 1996) or may emerge as the result of misattunements
within the interaction. Clients with hostile—dominant personalities have
been found to be less likely to form positive alliances, whereas a personality
factors such as histrionic, narcissistic, antisocial, and paranoid features were
found to be negatively related to Total Alliance as measured on the Working
Alliance Inventory (Muran, Segal, Samstag, & Crawford, 1994). This finding
is in keeping with the clinical literature, indicating the difficulties clinicians
face in facilitating the development of an initial therapeutic alliance and
managing countertransference, including negative responses, when working
with clients in the borderline-narcissistic spectrum (Gabbard et al., 1988;
Gabbard & Wilkinson, 1994). Although negative reactions on the part of
the therapist are expected and understandable, failure to adequately contain
them and to respond appropriately may lead to alliance ruptures and precipi-
98 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

tous terminations of treatment. Novice clinicians in particular must be
provided with safety and understanding within the supervisory relationship
to help them explore their responses and to learn the skills of managing
rather than acting out their personal reactions.
A more vexing challenge for the supervisor occurs when a supervisee
appears to initiate and reinforce negative patterns of interaction with seem-
ingly little cognizance of personal involvement. Beyond the limitations that
can accompany inexperience or inadequate training, these interactions may
reflect more general relational or personality tendencies. In light of the
ethical responsibilities to the client, the supervisor must more actively focus
attention on the therapist's in-session behaviors, in an attempt to stave off
a therapeutic crisis. Although at times explicit instruction is required, we
have found that reorienting the supervisee to take a stance of inquiry, to
decenter, and to step back from a defensive mode of reacting is sufficient
to interrupt the cycle of misattunements. These episodes may be understood
to result from the novice clinician's maladaptive response to a situation of
interpersonal anxiety, danger, and loss of control. As the novice therapist
feels increased anxiety and incompetence, maladaptive behavioral reper-
toires derived from personal influences override professional training. In the
face of mounting anxiety and self-criticism, the supervisee may resort to
becoming increasingly controlling, subtly critical, or disengaged from the
client. Negative personal attributes, such as those identified by Ackerman
and Hilsenroth (2001; rigid, uncertain, exploitive, critical, distant, tense,
aloof, or distracted), may influence the therapist's interventions, covertly
reinforcing hostile patterns of interaction. Further, such tendencies may
lead the therapist to engage in negative countertransference enactments,
and jeopardize the treatment. Rather than offering flexible responses to the
client, the therapist may respond by becoming authoritarian and rigid in
his or her application of technique. In such circumstances, clinical interven-
tions are used in the service of self-protection and may express aggression
toward the client.
Supervisees can be helped by focusing attention to (a) the states of
mind and attributions that are being stimulated within the clinical inter-
action, (b) the mental states they are attempting to ward off, (c) the inter-
ventions applied and their effects on the interaction, and (d) alternative
behaviors. Further focused inquiry is required for the supervisee to gain
insight into the negative countertransference enactments and to obtain a
modicum of containment with which the threats to the therapeutic alliance
may be addressed. With insight and empathic understanding, the supervisee
may be able to offer a countermove that involves more responsive and
appropriate interventions and is sufficient to quell the turbulence of the
misalliance. With the diminution of the therapeutic crisis, the therapist
THERAPEUTIC AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS 
99

may then begin the work in supervision of clarifying the nature of the
enactment, understanding his or her personal involvement, and learning
how to address the rupture in the therapeutic alliance.
No matter the root cause of the misalliance in the therapeutic rela-
tionship, the ensuing countertransference and negative reactions must be
addressed in supervision. An appropriate and reality-based tone for this
examination can be obtained by keeping in mind the rigors of psychothera-
peutic work and the unique strains placed on the novice clinician, whose
sense of self and budding confidence as a psychologist are on the line in
every session. Supervision needs to provide a safe place for the exploration
of the personal responses to the psychological demands placed on the psycho-
therapist, taking into account that negative reactions come with the clini-
cal territory.
Addressing Ruptures in the Alliance
The development and maintenance of the therapeutic alliance is criti-
cal to the success of the treatment; indeed, it is one of the most urgent
tasks in the beginning of treatment. Horvath (2001) found that "[i]f a good
alliance is not developed by the fifth session, then the likelihood of successful
treatment outcome is significantly diminished. A corollary of this proposition
is that a misjudgment of the status of the alliance can endanger the treatment
outcome" (p. 171). Treatment not only proceeds on the foundation of a
strong alliance, but also is advanced through the successful resolution of
subsequent alliance disruptions, which, as per Bordin's theory, appear to
contribute to a client's progress. Strains within the alliance are seen as
natural phenomena within the treatment process (Bachelor & Salame, 2000;
Bordin, 1994; Safran & Muran, 2000a, 2000b, 2000c).
The multiple roles of clinician, educator, and evaluator become evident
when supervisors address ruptures in the therapeutic alliance. Supervisors
must act to ensure the welfare of the client and safeguard the treatment
process; provide understanding, mentoring, counsel, and instruction to the
supervisee; and evaluate the supervisee's ability to implement the recommen-
dations offered and to learn from the experience. Crises in therapeutic
relationships inevitably evoke a host of personal responses in novice clini-
cians, as they may be at a loss as to what to do to effectively address negative
reactions and deleterious processes. These circumstances are situations in
which personal rather than professional factors are apt to shape the interac-
tion. Theoretical and empirical research conducted by Safran (1993a,
1993b),Safran&Muran(1994,1995,1996,1998,2000a, 2000b, 2002c), and
others (Bordin, 1979,1994; Horvath, 2000, 2001; Safran, Muran, Samstag, &
Stevens, 2001) have contributed significantly to our understanding of the
100 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

therapeutic alliance, the causes of ruptures in the alliance processes, and
procedures that bring about the repair of alliance ruptures.
We start with the premise that threats to the alliance are common
rather than rare occurrences and are the products of complex interpersonal
interactions that involve the individual subjectivities of both participants.
Early in treatment, differences in expectations of treatment may forestall
the emergence of a nascent alliance. At times, patterns of hostile interactions
develop rapidly in which therapists actively, though unwittingly, contribute
to escalations that threaten the alliance and imperil the treatment. Novice
clinicians are at particular risk of enjoining these enactments, in light of
their understandable performance anxiety, inexperience, and interpersonal
discomfort in assuming a new professional role. In addition, personal limita-
tions derived from early and pervasive patterns of interpersonal relating may
prompt defense-inspired behaviors in response to the provocations of the
client, further exacerbating the negative process. Supervisees may be both
personally and professionally unprepared to deal effectively with the emo-
tionally charged and damaging interactions. Safran and Muran (2000b,
ZOOOc) provided a clinical model that supervisors may use in training super-
visees to manage alliance ruptures as well as directly in addressing ruptures
in the supervisory alliance.
Identifying the Causes of Ruptures in the Alliance
Ruptures and impasses result from conflicts in two major categories:
(a) tasks and goals of treatment and (b) problems in the bond dimension
of the relationship based on the conceptualization of Bordin (1979; Hill,
Nutt-Williams, Heaton, Thompson, & Rhodes, 1996; Safran & Muran,
2000b). There is some evidence that these categories reflect two independent
factors (agreement—confidence and relationship) that covary in contribution
to the alliance (Andrusyna, Tang, DeRubeis, & Luborsky, 2001). In both
circumstances, disagreements, misunderstanding, and confusion negatively
affect the development of a collaborative, empathic relationship. Strain may
be created in light of the procedures of the treatment; for example, active,
directive approaches are more likely to induce ruptures stemming from
clients feeling that they are being controlled (cf. Safran & Muran, 2000a),
or in experiential therapies, clients may have difficulty turning inward to
represent their experience in new ways or may question the usefulness of
such an activity (Watson & Greenberg, 2000, p. 175).
Misattunements may arise when differences in beliefs and values lead
to misunderstandings. A therapist may ignore or inadvertently devalue mat-
ters of importance to the client or be insensitive to culturally anchored
experiences, traditions, moral perspectives, and beliefs. In other instances,
THERAPEUTIC AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS 
101

intense transference-countertransference enactments may be triggered based
on personal factors. Both client and therapist may begin to feel at odds
with each other and may mutually be in a state of "not being understood,"
which may lead to negative attributions about the other and thereby under-
mine the therapeutic alliance. These states of mind raise anxiety and distrust
and for some clients (and clinicians) trigger immediate hostility. The associ-
ated cognitions and affects then prompt personality-based defensive and
aggressive responses. These responses may range from detachment and disin-
terested compliance to manifest expressions of distrust and hostility. Differ-
ences in expectations about treatment rapidly become conflicts in the bond,
and conversely, breaches of trust and empathy foreclose meaningful partici-
pation in the tasks of therapy. A coconstructed cycle of misattunements
becomes established, and the alliance deteriorates.
Although supervisees generally are comfortable disclosing to their su-
pervisors negative feelings toward clients (Yourman & Farber, 1996), many
may feel embarrassed or afraid of their supervisors' reactions when reporting
breaches in the alliance. Further, they may not perceive or know how to
address the tenuous quality of the therapeutic alliance. Supervisors can be
helpful by (a) collaborating with the supervisee to identify the initial sources
and nature of the conflict or misattunement, (b) processing negative counter-
transference reactions, and (c) providing support and clinical direction to
initiate resolution. Initial supervisory interventions aim to assist the therapist
in shifting from a position of negative countertransference to a posture that
allows a degree of objectivity. The supervisory alliance provides a context
to begin the process of "disembedding from the relational configuration [of
the therapy relationship]" (Safran & Muran, 200Gb, p. 108) and encourages
reflection on the events and meanings being mutually coconstructed. It is
crucial at this stage of the supervisory relationship that the supervisor avoids
interventions that may induce shame in the supervisee. Experiences of shame
will discourage clinicians from disclosing and reflecting on the personal
influences shaping their interventions. Shame-inducing comments parallel
the implicit dissatisfaction of the client with the therapist and may rupture
the supervisory alliance. An environment of safety and collaboration is
required to facilitate examination of personal factors.
The process of resolving the alliance rupture begins with direct inquiry
into the interactions and specific content that precipitated the negative
interactions (Rhodes, Hill, Thompson, & Elliott, 1994; Safran & Muran,
1995; Safran, Muran, & Samstag, 1994). Through close analysis of these
components, the supervisor assists the supervisee in developing an initial
understanding of the origins of the mutual negative reactions, as well as to
gain some training, through modeling by the supervisor, in ways to facilitate
such an analysis with the client. Ruptures may be precipitated by a breach
of the client's wants or needs, for example by doing something the client
102 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

does not want, giving unwanted advice, not properly focusing on the client's
concerns or failing to do something that the client wants or needs (Rhodes
etal., 1994). Also, Omer (1994, 2000) identified three major roads to
therapeutic impasse: (a) The therapist and the client develop a hopeless
narrative about the client's difficulties; (b) the therapeutic strategy grinds
to a halt; and (c) the therapeutic interaction becomes trapped in a negative
pattern. When the therapist and client are faced with an impasse in which
the therapeutic work is mired in nonproductive interactions, frustration
often ensues, leading to threats to the alliance and a complete breakdown of
the therapeutic relationship. Markers of ruptures in the therapeutic alliance
include both confrontational behaviors, for example, overt expression of
negative sentiments, disagreement about the goals or tasks of therapy, or
through self-esteem enhancing operation; and nonconfrontational behav-
iors, for example, compliance (which is ineffectual), indirect communication
of negative sentiments or hostility, or nonresponsiveness to therapist inter-
ventions. Sometimes, supervisors hear of the depth of frustration only after
the fact, when supervisees report a sense of relief at an impasse being solved
by a client leaving treatment. What goes unsolved, of course, is the rupture
in the alliance.
The supervisory process is not intended to determine the nature of
the rupture, in isolation of the client. Rather, supervision provides a means
for the development of provisional observations and interpretations. The
identification of the rupture marker and examination of the process are
accomplished within the therapeutic process, as a collaborative effort that
involves process metacommunication.
Although countertransference and its personal origins may be consid-
ered, we find it more useful to initially focus on the relational dimensions
of the clinical interaction. We recommend this focus because therapists
need to quickly gain an understanding of the interpersonal transactions
taking place so that they may circumvent repetitions of negative interaction
and commence rebuilding rapport. Through a sequential analysis of the
transactions, including consideration of the therapist's cognitions, attribu-
tions, affects, and behaviors, the therapeutic relational pattern can be identi-
fied. The therapist is also encouraged to imagine the experience of the
interaction from the point of view of the client. Perspective taking is neces-
sary for the clinician to develop an empathic understanding of the motives
behind the client's overt behaviors of aggression, withdrawal, or noncompli-
ance. Supervisors may use role-playing, empty-chair, and focusing techniques
in addition to inquiry and self-reflection to help the supervisee obtain a sense
of what sessions may be like for the client. The focus on the interpersonal
transactions does not mean that personal influences and reactions are sum-
marily dismissed. However, exploration of countertransference is situated
within the overarching goals of stabilizing the therapeutic relationship,
THERAPEUTIC AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS 
103

eliminating "acting in" on the part of the therapist, and beginning the
process of repairing the working alliance.
Supervising Metacommunication
A second task of supervision is to assist the supervisee to initiate the
process of metacomrnunication (Kiesler, 1996), a task that is essential to
the repair of the alliance. Metacommunication consists of the "attempt to
step outside of the relational cycle that is currently being enacted by treating
it as the focus of collaborative exploration: that is, communicating about
the transaction or implicit communication that is taking place" (Safran &
Muran, ZOOOb, p. 108, emphasis in original). This task is in keeping with
Interpersonal Process Recall (Kagan, 1980; Kagan &. Kagan, 1990; Kagan
& Kagan, 1997), a widely used procedure in which the supervisee is encour-
aged to describe underlying thoughts and feelings that occurred during the
therapeutic interaction. Such a procedure provides a means to process the
dynamics that shaped the clinical process and builds skills in metacognition,
which is essential in metacomrnunication.
Binder and Strupp (1997a) commented that what is required to meta-
communicate "involves what Schon (1987) calls 'reflection in action,' the
ability to observe process as one is participating in it and to improvise
effective strategies while one is in the midst of acting" (pp. 134-135).
Analysis of the relational and interpersonal transactions in addressing rup-
tures in the alliance should be emphasized rather than transference interpre-
tations. The supervisee may require support and guidance, as such a process
inevitably evokes personal vulnerability as well as the use of new clinical
skills. Further, metacomrnunication requires the therapist to bring the rela-
tionship to a new level of collaboration in which the immediate interaction
is the focus of inquiry. It involves a willingness to engage in the "here-and-
now analysis of maladaptive cognitions, sentiments, and behaviors that are
recurrently enacted in patterned form in the therapeutic relationship"
(Binder & Strupp, 1997a, pp. 133-134).
The use of metacomrnunication, which includes challenging clients
to disclose their experiences of the therapeutic interaction, has been found
to be necessary to the reestablishment of a viable working alliance. Kivlighan
and Schmitz (1992) found that improvement in poor working alliances was
related to increases in counselor challenges and in the focus placed on
the relationship. The process of metacomrnunication inevitably raises the
anxiety of the supervisee and illuminates the influence of personal contribu-
tions to psychological treatment. The psychologist may find that his or her
self-perceptions and behaviors are challenged by the client's observations
and commentary. It is often difficult for therapists, no matter their level of
training and experience, to hear that they are not as perceptive, empathic,
attentive, or helpful than they believe themselves to be.
104 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

STAGE 1
Attending to the Rupture Marker
C1
Client withdrawal rupture maker
T1
Therapist focuses client on
immediate experience
STAGE 2
Exploration of Rupture Experience
C2
Client expresses negative feelings
mixed with rupture marker
T2
Therapist facilitates self-assertion
STAGE 3
Exploration of Avoidance
C3a
Client discloses block
T3
Therapist probes block
C3b
Client explores block
STAGE 4
Self-Assertion
C4
Client self-asserts
T4
Therapist validates assertion
Figure 5.1. Therapeutic alliance rupture resolution model (C = Client; T = Therapist).
From "Resolving Therapeutic Alliance Ruptures: Diversity and Integration." Journal
of Clinical Psychology/In Session: Psychotherapy in Practice, 56(2), 233-243 (2000),
by J. D. Safran and J. C. Muran, © 2000 John Wiley & Sons, Inc. Reprinted with
permission.
Stages of the Repair Process
Safran and Muran (ZOOOb, ZOOOc) proposed a stage-process model in
which the rupture marker is identified, the block to affective expression is
explored, and the client is encouraged to explore and to assert his or her
experience of the rupture. Ruptures in the alliance may take the form of
withdrawal or confrontation. Withdrawal ruptures may manifest as disen-
gagement from the therapist, the client's own emotions, or the therapeutic
process. Confrontation ruptures involve overt expressions of anger, resent-
ment, or dissatisfaction with the therapist or the treatment (Safran & Muran,
ZOOOc). The stages of the repair process of the withdrawal rupture are
presented in Figure 5.1 (see Safran & Muran, ZOOOb, for a presentation of
the confrontation alliance and complete explication of the model).
THERAPEUTIC AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS
105

Safran and Muran (ZOOOc) provided a cogent description of the transi-
tion required of the therapist to commence the rebuilding of the alliance:
Therapists often begin the resolution process as coparticipants in a
maladaptive interpersonal cycle. Expressions of client hostility are often
responded to defensively or with counterhostility. Compliant or avoid-
ant responses to the rupture are often responded to with overbearing
or controlling behavior. For example, clients who respond to an interpre-
tation in a compliant fashion may elicit further attempts on the thera-
pist's part to control, dominate them, or tell them what to do. In such
situations, it is critical for therapists to become aware of the feelings
evoked in them and to begin metacommunicating with the client about
the interaction, rather than continuing to participate in the dysfunc-
tional cognitive-interpersonal cycle, (p. 240)
Commencing with this initial stage, the therapist actively elicits explo-
ration and disclosure of thoughts and feelings regarding the rupture, which
implicitly include negative feedback to the therapist. The therapist must
be in a posture of neutrality (or openness) and nondefensiveness to draw
forth and empathize with the experience of the client.
Many supervisees need to be explicitly prepared to accept perceptions
that differ from their own and to be reminded that the purpose is not to
assign blame for the rupture, but rather to provide empathic understanding
of the client's experience as well as to modify their own behavior. Further,
therapists require support and encouragement to stay engaged and to facili-
tate a process of intense emotion, which will likely stimulate a host of
personal reactions in the clinician.
Subsequent stages focus on the exploration of thoughts and feelings
associated with the rupture; the factors or resistances restricting such explora-
tion; the expression of negative sentiments, which initially includes a dis-
owning of responsibility, followed by a deepening awareness on disavowed
needs; and finally acceptance and communication to the therapist of wishes,
needs, and feelings.
Differences in clinical theory determine the content and use of the
material derived from the process of metacommunication (Safran & Muran,
1998). For example, psychodynamic clinicians may be interested in the
parallels between the client's perceptions of the therapeutic interaction
and the perceptions originating in developmentally salient relationships
(Frawley-O'Dea & Sarnat, 2001); experiential therapists may focus explicitly
on the conflicts in "experiencing" in the here and now; and cognitive
psychologists may focus on the schemas that inform the interpersonal trans-
actions in the clinical dyad (Greenwald & Young, 1998). Central to the
process of repair, regardless of the technical differences inherent in clinical
theories, is close attention to the here-and-now interpersonal dynamics. It
is through the client and clinician collaboratively working to understand
106 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

the natures of the transactions that the alliance can be rebuilt on a stronger
foundation. It has been our clinical experience that the resolution of alliance
ruptures not only is integral to maintaining the therapeutic relationship,
but also facilitates change processes directly related to the relational diffi-
culties that brought clients to psychotherapy in the first place. For clients,
the process of repairing the alliance rupture involves in vivo learning and
includes corrective emotional experiences, which may generalize to other
relationships. For novice clinicians, the experience of learning how to meta-
communicate, to face alliance ruptures and impasses directly, to understand
firsthand the influence of personal factors and countertransference, and
finally to successfully facilitate the repair of the alliance fosters the develop-
ment of important clinical competencies.
Supervision plays an integral role by providing supervisees with a
technical model to address threats to the alliance, a relationship that supports
the processes of disembedding and metacommunication, and, importantly,
empathic understanding. Beyond issues of training, the clinical task of
repairing alliances is essential to the efficacy of the treatment and as such
reflects the supervisor's commitment to provide the highest quality care of
the client. For example, there are cases in which, despite the best efforts
of the clinician, it appears that the alliance has been irreparably compro-
mised. The supervisor, to safeguard the client's welfare and treatment, may
initiate a number of interventions. For instance, the supervisor may conduct
a consultation with the client; although the supervisor may not using meta-
communication techniques, he or she will focus on the client's experience
and attempt to reestablish an initial alliance between the client and the
mental health institution. A useful entry point in such consultation is a
discussion of the client's expectations of treatment; this topic addresses the
goals and tasks components of the alliance, which have been found to affect
outcome (Horvath &. Symonds, 1991; Long, 2001; Tryon & Winograd,
2002). Following such clarification, collaboration can be aimed at reestab-
lishing treatment with the same clinician, commending treatment with a
different therapist, or initially conducting treatment with the supervisor
serving as a cotherapist.
Misunderstanding and misalliances may develop at times within super-
visory relationships. Using a metacommunication approach, supervisors can
facilitate growth within the alliance in a manner similar to that in the
clinical setting. Beyond repairing the alliance, such experiences provide
essential modeling and implicit training in the skill of metacommunication.
Conflicts that are not addressed in supervision may compromise the integrity
of the supervisory process as well as communicate through the supervisor's
behavior that avoidance and unresponsiveness are acceptable. The supervi-
sor's willingness and ability to respond directly to misattunement within
the supervisory relationship instill an ethic of responsiveness and counter any
THERAPEUTIC AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS 
107

tendency on the supervisee's part toward unresponsiveness as a professional
(Greben, 1985). In both clinical and supervisory settings, attention must
be paid to the power differential in the relationship to ensure that process
inquiry is used to forward mutual understanding rather than to stabilize or
to reassert the authority status of the supervisor or clinician with respect
to the supervisee or the client, respectively.
When difficulties emerge in a supervised case, novice clinicians under-
standably experience an increase in concern about their competence and
how the treatment impasse will influence their clinical evaluation. In fact,
fears regarding negative evaluations may actually play a role in weakening
the working alliance (Burke, Goodyear, & Guzzard, 1998). To the extent
that supervisees believe that their standing is in jeopardy, they may become
defensive, less disclosing, less effective, and potentially retaliatory toward
the client. However, if alliance ruptures are situated in the context of
naturally occurring challenges within the treatment process and are not
necessarily presented as indicators of therapist failure, students and interns
may be better able to facilitate the repair of the alliance. Evaluations are
best informed by how supervisees address ruptures and respond to recommen-
dations, rather than by the fact that threats to the alliance occurred. How-
ever, it is of serious concern when supervisees are unable or unwilling to
address their coconstruction of difficulties in therapeutic relationships and
are noncompliant with supervisors' recommendations for addressing alliance
ruptures. In situations where there are repeated threats to alliances across
clients and these threats appear to be based primarily within the relational
component, careful assessments of the supervisee's interpersonal and clinical
competencies, as well as suitability for psychotherapy practice, are required.
Therapist attributes that can negatively affect the formation of an
alliance with a client can equally influence the relationship between a
supervisor and a supervisee. In fact, we believe that the adverse impacts
can actually be as or more deleterious to the supervisor-supervisee relation-
ship, in light of the unique power differential in supervision. For example,
a client can easily, in some respects, leave a therapist without threat; a
supervisee may be in a more precarious position should a destructive misalli-
ance be established. We believe that the therapist personal attributes that
positively influence the therapeutic alliance, for example, being flexible,
honest, respectful, trustworthy, confident, warm, interested, and open (Ack-
erman Si Hilsenroth, 2003, p. 1; see also Horvath, 2001), play a similar role
in the supervisory alliance. Additionally, many of the techniques that were
identified by Ackerman and Hilsenroth (2003) as positively related with
therapeutic alliance, for example, exploration, reflection, noting past success,
and accurate interpretation, also contribute to a positive supervisory alliance.
Additional competencies, such as values sensitivity and perspective taking,
108 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

conjoined with the relational qualities, establish a supervision alliance that
encourages the examination of personal factors and countertransference.
Ruptures and Impasses in the Supervisory Alliance
The qualities and experiences that affect the development of therapeu-
tic relationships similarly affect the supervisory relationship. Interpersonal
and professional competencies, such as empathy, warmth, respect, clinical
knowledge, and skill, as well as agreement concerning the goals and tasks of
supervision, contribute to the formation of an effective supervisory working
alliance in which personal influence and countertransference may be ad-
dressed. Inadequacies in those competencies or lapses in interpersonal or
professional conduct may threaten the development of the working alliance.
The Working Alliance Inventory (Bahrick, 1989, Appendix B, this volume)
provides a useful self-report measure to assess alliance factors (i.e., task,
bond, goal) in the supervisory relationship. Further investigation is required
to establish its reliability and validity.
Ladany et al. (2000) reported that although the supervisees believed
that supervisor countertransference initially weakened the relationship, they
later stated that it strengthened the supervision. Part of the benefit was
identified in the supervisor's facilitation of a discussion with the intern and
in his or her efforts to deepen the intern's understanding of some of the
interpersonal dynamics that occur in therapy (p. 109). Supervisors managed
their reactions by consulting with colleagues, participating in a supervision
group, or disclosing aspects of their experience with the intern (p. 110).
Important to the resolution of the countertransference were identifying the
reactions as countertransference, seeking consultation, and using disclosure.
Such processing appears crucial to managing reactions that hold the potential
to be expressed counterproductively.
Negative or counterproductive experiences may occur and, when not
addressed, may result in ruptures and impasses. Such conditions threaten the
viability of the working alliance, particularly with respect to the processing of
personal factors, and in turn compromise the ability of the supervisor to
adequately monitor the treatment and to safeguard the client. Ramos-
Sanchez et al. (2002) reported that 21.4% of the participants in a survey
of psychology interns and graduate students indicated having a negative
experience in supervision (p. 199). Negative experiences were associated
with weaker supervisory alliances, and the impact of the experiences ap-
peared to be "global and long lasting, causing supervisees to question their
choice of career and possibly change their career plans" (p. 200). Gray et al.
(2001) conducted interviews with 13 psychotherapy trainees, each of whom
reported experiencing a counterproductive event in supervision. The trainees
THERAPEUTIC AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS 
109

described a wide range of emotional responses and believed that these
incidents weakened the supervisory relationship, affected their work with
clients, and changed their ways of approaching their supervisors; for example,
most did not discuss the counterproductive event with their supervisors.
These reports are consistent with previous research findings and point to
the necessity of supervisors' addressing conflicts in supervisory relationships.
The best cure is found in prevention.
Supervisors support this aim by being mindful of the effects of their
personal and professional conduct and striving to be responsive to the needs
of the supervisee by conveying a clear understanding of the objectives of
the supervisor and the mutual responsibilities of the supervisor and super-
visee. Events involving shame, parallel process, and boundary violations are
of particular importance when addressing personal factors in supervision.
Shame
In supervision, novice clinicians are required to examine their use of
personal influence and the intrusion of countertransference in treatment.
Such exploration necessarily involves personal exposure, which may induce
feelings of discomfort, anxiety, and shame. Inquiry into countertransference
reactions, in addition to the ongoing evaluation of technical skills, focuses
attention directly on the supervisee and may create a sense of vulnerability
as well as amplify tendencies toward unreasonable self-criticism. Alonso and
Rutan (1988) observed that, although psychotherapy supervision stimulates
shame, shame is rarely addressed in supervision. Shame-inducing experiences
may constitute counterproductive or negative events that not only foreclose
the important examination of the clinician's personal influence on treat-
ment, but may also lead to nondisclosure of the actual transactions occurring
in psychotherapy. In such circumstances, the supervisory alliance may be-
come so weakened that it is rendered incapable of fulfilling its responsibilities
to the client, the supervisee, and the training institutions.
Shame is a consequence of interpersonal as well as intrapersonal dynam-
ics. Supervisees may feel embarrassed when personal lapses or influences are
discussed with valued supervisors, or they may feel shame when discovering
a discrepancy between their performance and internally held standards.
Shame inducement therefore is a product of both the relationship and the
individual. That moments of shame or embarrassment appear in supervision
should not be surprising, in light of the intrinsic demands of training in a
very personally demanding profession, a profession that at times has been
referred to as impossible. Talbot (1995), writing of her own experiences as
a supervisee, offers the perspective that shame may arise when the therapist
fears or experiences not being approved of or admired by an idealized
supervisor. Although supervisors may be vigilant about not providing feed-
110 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

back in a shame-inducing manner, the supervisee may nonetheless feel
shame. One should therefore be observant of—and in Talbot's (1995) view,
"unearth" —the hidden manifestations of shame, such as increases in nondis-
closure, avoidance of discussion of certain cases, intellectualization, and
provision of experience-distant or insipid descriptions of clinical interac-
tions. Hahn (2001), drawing on the work of Nathanson (1992), identified
four reactions to shame that may affect supervision: withdrawal, avoidance,
attack on the self, and attack on others.
Supervisors can initiate exploration or the supervisee's feeling of shame
or embarrassment by focusing attention, in an empathic and supportive
manner, on the supervisee's experience of the supervisor's commentaries
and recommendations and by acknowledging the challenges involved in
learning to conduct psychotherapy.
The supervisor must take a proactive stance, particularly if Gray et al.'s
(2001) findings represent supervisees' beliefs that supervisors are not cogni-
zant of counterproductive events and that supervisees are not disposed to
bring such events into discussion. Supervisors need to examine any personal
factors and their own transferences to their supervisees, as well as to consider
institutional and social sources of shaming that may contribute to ruptures
in the alliance. Talbot (1995) offers six recommendations for address-
ing shame in supervision: (1) Be alert to the supervisee's disguised shame,
(2) encourage the supervisee to explore how the therapy and the supervi-
sion are experienced, (3) demonstrate the qualities of a psychotherapist by
assisting the supervisee in uncovering personal material that affects the
psychotherapy, (4) create an environment of safety where shame-related
phenomena can be discussed with candor and curiosity, (5) ease insecurities
by modeling the activities that supervisees seek to encourage from their
clients, and (6) avoid attempts to dissuade the supervisee of an idealizing
transference toward the activities.
Parallel Process
The concept of parallel process, originating within the psychoanalytic
literature (Arlow, 1963; Bromberg, 1982; Doehrman, 1976; Ekstein & Wal-
lerstein, 1958; Searles, 1955), suggests that dynamics of the therapeutic
relationship stimulate and are reflected within the supervisory relationship.
The therapist, through the process of identification with the client or, for
some theorists, primarily by means of projective identification, enacts the
client's dynamics with the supervisor. Rather than obtaining insight into
the transference—countertransference matrix, therapists and supervisors rep-
licate unconsciously derived roles and object relations (Grey & Fiscalini,
1987). Similarly, supervisors may bring into the interaction processes origi-
nating in contexts external to the supervisory relationship that result in
THERAPEUTIC AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS 
111
