parallelism as a triadic system (Gediman & Wolkenfeld, 1980). Frawley-
O'Dea and Sarnat (2001) found that, "[w]hile a parallel process can originate
in either the treatment relationship or the supervisory dyad, it is the super-
visee who, by her overlapping membership in both dyads, necessarily is the
interdyadic conduit of the relational material expressed through a parallel
process" (p. 174). Symmetrical parallel processes, involving concordant or
complementary countertransference, may lead to impasses in both the treat-
ment and the supervisory relationship as enactments supersede the partici-
pants' abilities to gain awareness of the relational patterns being repeated.
Despite the paucity of empirical support (Mothersole, 1999) and, for some
clinicians, outright rejection of the concept (L. Miller & Twomey, 1999),
the idea of parallel process appears within the literature to offer a theoretical
vantage for considering possible dynamics influencing the supervisory rela-
tionship (Friedlander, Siegel, & Brenock, 1989; McNeill & Worthen, 1989;
Morrissey & Tribe, 2001).
Caution should be exercised in applying this concept, as similarities
at the surface may not reflect dynamic congruence (Baudry, 1993), indepen-
dence may exist between similar relational patterns (Fosshage, 1997), and
reactions originating in the supervisory relationship may be defensively
relocated to the treatment. Appreciation of the intersubjective nature of
interpersonal relationships (Fosshage, 1997; Ogden, 1994) allows for consid-
eration of the numerous independent and interrelated influences that shape
clinical and supervisory processes. The contents and processes that make
up a given supervision draw on both independent and interrelated experi-
ences of the therapist and the supervisee as well as the coconstruction of
dynamics unique to the supervisory relationship. No matter their theoretical
allegiance, supervisors need to be mindful of the range of influences and
pressures existing within the treatment relationship that may come to be
expressed within supervision. Failure to attend to such dynamics may lead
to misunderstanding and ruptures in the working alliance. Parallel processes,
to the extent that they exist, provide useful sources of information regarding
the relational patterns associated with their interpersonal conflicts and psy-
chological difficulties.
Boundary Violations
Maintenance of appropriate boundaries contributes to the formation
and preservation of a safe and trusting professional relationship within which
the novice clinician can explore his or her personal contributions to the
therapeutic process. Violations of professional and personal boundaries un-
dermine the supervision, particularly with respect to the addressing of per-
sonal material and countertransference. Breaches of professional ethics (e.g.,
sexual harassment and dual relationships) and unprofessional conduct (e.g.,
112 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

unavailability to supervisees and disinterest) may irrevocably compromise
the supervisory relationship. Any misuse of the power differential in the
relationship or any deviation from the legitimate uses of authority (which
is ultimately vested in the power to evaluate) forecloses the possibility of
an effective course of training and case management. The addressing of
therapist countertransference constitutes a boundary that is at times difficult
to clearly demarcate. Intrusions into the personal lives of clinicians through
the quasiprovision of therapy, the use of personal information divulged in
supervision for nonclinical or noneducational purposes, and breaches of
confidentiality reflect significant violations. Beyond these overt behaviors,
supervisors should be sensitive in addressing countertransference and inter-
personal deficiencies and conflicts. A clear understanding, which could
take the form of a contract, at the beginning of supervision regarding
the responsibilities of the supervisor and the nature and processes of the
evaluative, training, and case-management functions should be conveyed.
Attention should be placed on the effects of countertransference and inter-
personal shortcomings specific to professional responsibilities of the student or
intern. The supervisor's responsibility is limited to safeguarding the client,
ensuring the highest standards of care, and educating and training the
supervisee. Although the empathy, support, understanding, and awareness
obtained in supervision may in fact be therapeutic, a supervisor cannot and
should not serve as a psychotherapist to the supervisee. Respect for this
boundary ensures that the opportunity is extended to the supervisee to
mature as a clinician and to gain awareness of the personal factors that
influence the provision of psychological treatment.
Supervisors demonstrate and model competencies and ensure the integ-
rity of the supervisory process by always being mindful of the nature of
their influence, by being respectful of the supervisee, by minimizing shame-
inducing processes, by directly addressing ruptures to the working alliance,
by considering intrapersonal and interpersonal forces that affect the relation-
ship, and by maintaining appropriate boundaries. Faithful attention to these
factors not only builds a positive and mutually rewarding supervisory relation,
but also ensures that appropriate supervision and counsel are obtained to
provide competent client care.
Competencies
The competencies required to address the supervisory alliance include the
following:
• Interpersonal skills involving the abilities to communicate, to understand the
experience of the self and that of the supervisee (perspective taking); to
experience and express empathy; to provide support; to trust; and to reflect
on one's behavior and its impact on others, including the ability to identify
alliance strain, rupture, and countertransference
THERAPEUTIC AND SUPERVISORY RELATIONSHIPS 
113

Values of integrity-in-relationship, ethical values-based practice, appreciation
of diversity, and science-informed practice
Knowledge of the literature regarding alliance and knowledge and skill in
performing and teaching metacommunication through multiple learning
strategies (e.g., instruction, demonstration, role-playing, and critiquing)
114 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

6
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE
IN SUPERVISION
Notwithstanding that it is a core component of psychology training,
diversity is one of the most neglected areas in supervision training and
research. The majority of attention to diversity has been devoted to culture—
just one particular aspect—rather than to the broader construct. Diversity
includes culture in all its aspects, as well as socioeconomic status, race,
religion, disabilities or ableness, age, gender, and sexual orientation, all of
which may converge and intersect (Bingham, Porche-Burke, James, Sue, &
Vasquez, 2002). As Ridley, Mendoza, and Kanitz (1994) stated, "educators
with the best of intentions find themselves caught between the press to
provide MCT (multicultural training) and the dual disadvantage of their
own inadequate training and the embryonic state of the field" (p. 228). This
is the case not only for culture but also for all areas of diversity. Clinicians
report lower self-perceived competence levels in work with clients with
motor and sensory impairment and with Hispanic, Black Hispanic, Asian
American, and Native American clients (Allison, Echemendia, Crawford,
& Robinson, 1996). That consideration of diversity is essential to psychology
training is unequivocal.
In this chapter, we describe the required role of diversity in psychology
training, the current state of the art, barriers to integration of diversity into
psychology training, and definitions of multicultural competence. Conceptu-
alizations of culture are considered as well as approaches to acculturation
115

as they apply to supervision. Emic (conceptions common to a particular
ethnic or minority group and thus explicative) and etic (conceptions
universal to people across culture) parameters are applied to training and
to supervision. We then outline gender and sexual orientation as they
have been approached in training models, providing a context to training
efforts. We also review the relative deficits in training in disabilities and
age as they affect supervision. The final sections focus on enhancing diver-
sity competence and development of multicultural competence through
understanding theories of racial and minority development and assess-
ment techniques. These concepts serve as benchmarks and standards for
diversity competency in programs such as internships and other training
programs.
In "Domain D: Cultural and Individual Differences and Diversity,"
the Committee on Accreditation of the American Psychological Association
(APA) lays out a framework for internship programs:
The program recognizes the importance of cultural and individual differ-
ences and diversity in the training of psychologists.
1. The program has made systematic, coherent, and long-term efforts
to attract and retain interns and staff from differing ethnic, racial,
and personal backgrounds into the program. Consistent with such
efforts, it acts to ensure a supportive and encouraging learning envi-
ronment appropriate for the training of diverse individuals and the
provision of training opportunities for a wide spectrum of individuals.
Further the program avoids any action that would restrict program
access on grounds that are irrelevant to success in internship training
or a career in professional psychology.
2. The program has a thoughtful and coherent plan to provide interns
with relevant knowledge and experiences about the role of cul-
tural and individual diversity in psychological phenomena and
professional practice. It engages in positive efforts designed to ensure
that interns will have opportunities to learn about cultural and
individual diversity as they relate to the practice of psychology.
The avenues by which these goals are achieved are to be devel-
oped by the program." (APA, Committee on Accreditation, 2002e,
p. 16).
The "Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct" (APA,
2002a) states the following:
Where scientific or professional knowledge in the discipline of psychol-
ogy establishes that an understanding of factors associated with age,
gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national origin,
religion, sexual orientation, disability, language, or socioeconomic
116 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

status is essential for effective implementation of their services
or research, psychologists have or obtain the training, experience,
consultation, or supervision necessary to ensure the competence of
their services, or they make appropriate referrals.... (2.01, Boundaries
of Competence, 1 b)
MULTICULTURAL DIVERSITY
Sheer demographics indicate that attention to cultural diversity is a
necessity, not an option. The meanings of the terms majority and minority
are no longer clear, as so-called minorities have become pluralities. With
these changes, the Eurocentric bias of the field of psychology is evolving,
but not fast enough. Guthrie (1998) titled his text Even the Rat Was White:
A Historical View of Psychology, documenting the history of racism in the
development of the field of psychology. It is time for supervisors and super-
visees to integrate the strengths of culture and diversity into pedagogy and
conceptual frameworks.
Through the appreciation of and education about diversity in supervi-
sion, underlying racism, prejudice, and negative cultural attitudes, albeit
subtle, are addressed. Education and exposure lead to increased understand-
ing, which in turn results in frames of respect for difference. Rather than
conformity, stereotypes, or assimilation, the diversity-competent psycholo-
gist considers the strengths of the individual, culture, and community and
how these factors can be integrated into a plan for treatment and develop-
ment. It is a given that the culturally competent psychologist is cognizant
of his or her own cultural background, its strengths, and the unique perspec-
tives it casts on his or her worldview.
STATE OF THE ART
Reports of student training in diversity issues reflect mediocre efforts
in training on counseling ethnic minorities and a lack of cultural infusion
into training in general. "Such a lack of systematic instruction and evaluation
in ethnic minority issues is particularly disturbing when one considers they
had seen ethnic minority clients during both pre-internship and internship
training" (Mintz, Bartels, & Rideout, 1995, p. 319). These authors concluded
that the results of their survey of APA-approved graduate training sites
(46% response rate) showed that these sites do not reflect the spirit of
APA accreditation criteria nor are they in line with the APA Ethical
Standard 2.01(b; stated previously). Much of the research and theorizing
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
117

has focused on multiculturalism rather than on the broader realm of diversity.
We would advocate a consideration of the entire spectrum of diversity;
however, as multiculturalism has been a focus in the literature, we describe
a significant amount of that research.
Mintz et al. (1995) reported that counseling-program interns were
slightly better prepared than their clinical counterparts in coursework
and examination of biases, a finding also reported by graduate students
(Pope-Davis, Reynolds, Dings, & Nielson, 1995). However, Quintana
and Bernal (1995) cautioned that any differences between the training
given to the two groups are not meaningful, because both need to
improve. Mintz et al. (1995) agreed. Bernal and Castro (1994) found
that, among 104 APA-accredited doctoral programs, the "structural basics"
(p. 803) are often lacking. Deficits exist in minority-related courses,
faculty conducting minority mental health research, and use of off-campus
clinical settings serving ethnic-minority students for practicum placement.
In a study of psychology interns and their supervisors (57.4% response
rate), 9 interns (30%) and 21 supervisors (70%) reported that they had
never completed a course in multicultural or cross-cultural counseling
(Constantine, 1997). A study of counseling, school, and clinical graduates
who completed their training between 1985 and 1987 (48.7% response
rate) revealed that small numbers of the respondents felt extremely or
very competent to do clinical work with African Americans (37.5%),
Asian Americans (15.8%), Black Hispanics (11.5%), Hispanics (25.9%),
Native Americans (7.7 %), gay men (34.8%), lesbians (38.6%), bisexual
individuals (33.2%), and individuals with sensory impairments (18.9%),
even though they reported that they worked with a significant number
of members of these populations (Allison, Crawford, Echemendia, Robin-
son, & Knepp, 1994). Allison et al. reported low rates of coursework or
relevant training in practicum and internship on providing services to
diverse populations. Graduate students in APA-approved settings felt
even less prepared to work with bisexual clients than with lesbian or
gay clients (Phillips & Fischer, 1998). It is interesting that in the Allison
et al. (1996) study of self-rated competence, psychologists (49% return
rate) rated themselves most competent in treating European Americans,
females, and economically disadvantaged clients and least competent in
treating Asian American, Black Hispanic, and Native American clients.
The authors reported a correlation between higher diversity of caseload
carried and perceived self-competence. A small group of psychologists in
that study reported (8% response rate) that, although they did not view
themselves as competent to provide services to that client group, they
continued to do so. It is extremely worrisome that, according to self-
reports, psychologists are practicing in an area outside their self-perceived
competence—an ethical infraction.
118 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

BARRIERS TO THE INTEGRATION OF DIVERSITY INTO
PSYCHOLOGY TRAINING
We are increasingly aware of the pain inflicted by supervisors and
supervisees who function with inadequate knowledge of diversity. The pain
is reflected in the supervisee's feeling hurt or misunderstood (Fukuyama,
1994a; McNeill et al., 1995; McRoy et al., 1986) client distress or withdrawal
from treatment (Garnets, Hancock, Cochran, Goodchilds, & Peplau, 1991;
Pope-Davis et al., 2002; Priest, 1994), and damage done by faulty assessments
due to lack of a knowledge base (Goodman'Delahunty, 2000). In a small
study of trainees in South Africa, Kleintjes and Swartz (1996) provide
perspective on the difficulty of introducing race. Multiple reasons why Black
students do not discuss color in supervision in a "White" university were
presented. Trainees expressed difficulty with such discussion because they
felt the setting was a "colourless zone (sic);" they felt that they could be
perceived as making excuses for poor performance or be seen as using
Blackness as a defense against other issues, or they feared being seen as
pathologically preoccupied with color and discrimination. Also they may
not have felt secure enough to raise the issue of color or may have wondered
whether the issue should be dealt with personally. Without a structure for
introduction of race as well as other aspects of diversity, these subjects may
be ignored, at great cost.
One of the reasons that culture does not come up in supervision is
that many supervisors are not meeting the minimum requirement of knowing
at least as much as their trainees know about cultural competency (J. M.
Bernard, 1994) or diversity. Graduate programs have a greater emphasis on
cultural competence presently than was the case when most supervisors
were themselves trained. Even in the current training climate, few curricula
take an integrated cultural approach; most relegate culture to a single course
or just a few courses (Yutrzenka, 1995). Although counseling-center training
directors (49% return rate) reported that 88% of their centers offer a seminar
on multicultural counseling, the mean duration of such seminars is nine
sessions, and there is little emphasis on integrating multicultural issues into
seminars and on religion (Lee et al., 1999). The low systematic emphasis
on religion and spirituality was confirmed for counseling programs (Schulte,
Skinner, &. Claiborn, 2002) and for clinical training programs (Brawer,
Handal, Fabricatore, Roberts, & Wajda-Johnston, 2002). Religion is reported
highly salient by most persons (Gallup & Johnson, 2003; Gallup & Jones,
2000), as in many cultures spirituality and religion are inseparable from
physical, mental, or health concerns (Fukuyama & Sevig, 1999). Transgen-
der issues have been ignored or pathologized (Carroll & Gilroy, 2002), and
gender has been dealt with mainly on a theoretical level (Granello, Beamish,
& Davis, 1997). Nilsson, Berkel, Flores, Love, Wendler, & Mecklenburg
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
119

(2003) reported low attention to sexual orientation and religion in their
review of 11 years of Professional Psychology Research and Practice. The
role of religion in training is explored by Shafranske (in press) and Shafranske
and Falender (2004). The number of courses offered in graduate programs
has actually decreased in the area of disability; such courses are now rare
(Olkin, 2002).
A barrier to implementing this critical curriculum is the lack of empiri-
cal support for the few existing models of ethnic and cross-cultural training
and their relationship to treatment efficacy (Yutrzenka, 1995). Another is
the lack of focus on self-knowledge and exploration, both cognitive and
emotional, in psychology training (Carter, 2001). As a result, supervisors
have an academic view of culture, distant from their own personal being.
Supervisors who have less multicultural competence reinforce avoidance of
racial issues in their White trainees (Steward, Wright, Jackson, & Jo, 1998),
perhaps because race is not viewed as salient to their identities (T. L.
Robinson, 1999). However, we are reminded that "cultural provincialism
is not a disease that afflicts only Caucasians" (Myers, Echemendia, & Trim-
ble, 1991, p. 9). That is, whatever the culture of the supervisor and super-
visee, it is incumbent on the dyad to process and explore the implications
of the cultural and diversity configuration among the client, supervisee-
therapist, and supervisor and not to be complacent in one's preconceptions.
Any cultural group can make incorrect judgments about another.
Some believe that White people do not have a culture. On the contrary,
Whites are as diverse a population as any other group, and greater conscious-
ness needs to be raised among Whites that they do have a culture, a history,
and a story. Richardson and Molinaro (1996) suggested that the White
emphasis on exploring the differences of others rather than looking at
their own characteristics may promote unintentional ethnocentrism. Other
barriers are guilt over being White and the existence of multitudes of other
pressing and critical areas of training, making it hard to implement all of
them (Lee et al., 1999). These findings are disappointing given the profound
and intrinsic impact of culture on every aspect of training and psychotherapy.
It is imperative that cultural-competence training be valued (Carter, 2001).
Another barrier may lie in the process of diversity education itself.
The processes of self-discovery and acknowledging one's own cultural biases
and prejudices may induce resistance, defensiveness, and inhibition (Abreu,
2001). Another problem has been the focus on particular groups as unitary,
such as Black, White, Hispanic, gay, and lesbian. This unfortunate focus
has resulted in increased stereotyping and less appreciation of the vast
multitude of difference within groups when one considers the membership
of each individual in other demographic groups. In fact, within-group differ-
ences have been shown to exceed between-group differences (Suzuki, McRae,
& Short, 2001). The concept of "collective identities" derived from family,
120 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

gender, race, and ethnicity (Fukuyama & Ferguson, 2000, p. 82) has not
received adequate attention even though multiple factors determine one's
identity, not a single one.
In attempting to explain why simply recruiting diverse faculty and
students does not automatically result in a functioning multicultural program,
Pope-Davis, Liu, Toporek, and Brittan-Powell (2001) described the necessity
of a "complete contextual change" that encompasses not only a commitment
to multicultural issues but also the creation and maintenance of a positive
environment in which to nurture them (p. 124). For example, insertion
of various ethnic-racial and gay, lesbian, and bisexual (GLB) content in
application materials is associated with obtaining higher numbers of students
with those identities (Bidell, Turner, & Casas, 2002).
MULTICULTURAL COMPETENCE DEFINED
Multicultural-counseling competency has been defined in a number
of ways. Fuertes (2002) identified 16 different conceptual and theoretical
approaches to multicultural competency and discussed how the perspectives
supplement, but do not supplant, a theoretical approach. The most influential
approach, presented by D. W. Sue, Arredondo, and McDavis (1992) in an
APA Division 17 position paper, defined multicultural competency as a
"therapist's awareness of assumptions about human behavior, values, biases,
preconceived notions, personal limitations; understanding the worldview of
the culturally different client without negative judgments; and developing
and practicing appropriate, relevant, and sensitive intervention strategies
and skills in working with culturally different clients" (p. 481). Thus, multi-
cultural competency is organized into the three categories of attitudes and
beliefs, knowledge, and skills. This organization has served as the basis for
much of the subsequent research and conceptualization in the field. However,
factor-analytic studies have shown little support for a tridimensional concep-
tualization and may suggest a unitary-factor construct (Ponterotto, Rieger,
Barrett, & Sparks, 1994). Some have also suggested that the role of the
relationship between client and therapist-supervisee (Sodowsky, Taffe,
Gutkin, & Wise, 1994), racial identity (Ponterotto et al., 1994), and racial-
identity development be added to the framework. The relationship between
client and therapist-supervisee would include client disclosure, counselor
behavior and approach, and equity and power in the relationship (Pope-
Davis et al., 2002). Racial-identity development refers to the stage of devel-
opment of each of the participants in his or her racial identity.
Adding social justice to the definition, D. W. Sue (2001) redefined
cultural competence as follows:
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
121

The ability to engage in actions or create conditions that maximize
the optimal development of client and client systems. Multicultural
counseling competence is defined as the counselor's acquisition of aware-
ness, knowledge, and skills needed to function effectively in a pluralistic
democratic society (ability to communicate, interact, negotiate, and
intervene on behalf of clients from diverse backgrounds), and on an
organizational/societal level, advocating effectively to develop new
theories, practices, policies, and organizational structures that are more
responsive to all groups, (p. 802)
A definition more operationalized to a training setting was proposed
by Ponterotto and Casas (1987):
Multicultural competence includes knowledge of clients' culture and
status, actual experiences with these clients, and the ability to devise
innovative strategies vis-a-vis the unique client's needs. A multicultur-
ally competent program instills in its students these competencies, in-
fuses minority issues into all program courses . . ., and has adequate
representation of minority students and faculty members, (p. 433)
Although self-awareness is a component of cultural competence, incor-
poration of an integrated awareness, understanding, and competence with
one's own cultural or multidiverse background has been slow to come in train-
ing environments. D. W. Sue et al. (1992) defined cultural self-awareness
to include awareness of the influence of biases, awareness of personal limita-
tions, awareness of how one's heritage affects definitions of normality and
abnormality, awareness of one's individual racism, and ultimately an under-
standing of oneself as a racial and cultural being and movement to seek a
nonracist identity. We believe that self-knowledge and awareness of one's
own cultural self are critical preconditions to cultural awareness. Part of
attaining awareness entails understanding the strengths inherent in one's
own cultural heritage and how they translate into beliefs, values, and behav-
ior. Until a supervisor has developed this level of competency, it is difficult,
if not impossible, to be an excellent supervisor. Little, if any, attention is
given to self-awareness in most psychology graduate training programs or
in supervisor training. Thus, this vital precondition is usually not met.
The translation of the D. W. Sue et al. (1992) framework to interac-
tions between the client and the therapist-supervisee has been problematic.
S. Sue, Zane, and Young (1994) stated, "What is needed are approaches
that propose specific hypotheses as to how the psychosocial experiences
of ethnic minorities affect certain important processes in psychotherapy"
(p. 809). Fischer, Jome, and Atkinson (1998) proposed common factors that
contribute to client healing, including the therapeutic relationship, a shared
worldview of client and therapist, meeting client's expectations, and use of
rituals or interventions that both therapist and client view as appropriate.
122 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

These common factors are viewed as organizing factors of the trainee's
conceptualizations, integration of multiculturalism into interventions,
and instruction.
Building on the work of Fischer et al. (1998), Constantine and Ladany
(2001) incorporated the component of self-awareness by proposing an exten-
sion in which multicultural competency consists of six dimensions:
• self-awareness: understanding one's own multiple cultural iden-
tities, personal biases, and how socialization affects values
and attitudes;
• general knowledge of multicultural issues: general knowledge
of psychological and social issues, prejudicial attitudes, discrimi-
nation, and knowledge of emics;
• multicultural-counseling self-efficacy: confidence in one's abil-
ity to perform successfully, based on a behavior set—not simply
a self-perception of competence;
• understanding of unique client variables: understanding how
personal attributes, situations, and other factors affect client
behavior;
• formation of an effective counseling working alliance: includes
addressing multicultural issues within the working alliance;
• multicultural-counseling skills: the ability to approach multicul-
tural issues effectively in therapy.
The Fisher et al. (1998) and Constantine and Ladany (2001) frame-
works integrate etic, universalistic approaches, with emic, culture-specific
knowledge, as well as general-counseling competency.
Another very comprehensive approach is provided by the 12 "minimal
multicultural competencies for practice" (N. D. Hansen, Pepitone-Arreola-
Rockwell, & Greene, 2000). The following is a summary of the competencies
that Hansen et al. distilled from the literature:
• "[ajwareness of how one's own cultural heritage, gender, class,
ethnic-racial identity, sexual orientation, disability, and age
cohort help shape personal values, assumptions, and biases re-
lated to identified groups;
• knowledge of the following factors:
• historical and cultural embeddedness and change of psycho-
logical theory, inquiry methods, and professional practices,
• history, manifestation, and psychological sequelae of oppres-
sion, prejudice, and discrimination,
• sociopolitical influences (e.g., poverty, stereotyping, stigmati-
zation, and marginalization) impinging on identified groups,
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
123

• culture-specific diagnosis; normative values about illness,
worldview, family structures, and gender roles; impacts on
personality formation; developmental outcomes; and manifes-
tation of illness, and
• culture-specific assessment techniques;
• ability to do the following:
• evaluate emic and etic hypotheses,
• self-assess multicultural competence,
• modify assessment tools and qualify conclusions, and
• design and implement nonbiased effective treatment plans
and interventions for multiple groups (condensed from Han-
sen, Pepitone-Arreola-Rockwell, & Greene, 2000, p. 654,
with permission; please refer to the article for the full listing
of competencies).
Hansen et al. (2000) proposed that use of these competencies could
infuse multiculturalism into the entire training curriculum.
Another consequential framework of knowledge regarding cultural
competence is the "Guidelines for Providers of Psychological Services to
Ethnic, Linguistic, and Culturally Diverse Populations" (American Psycho-
logical Association, 1993a). Among the myriad important aspects is the
directive that the counselor has the responsibility to gain knowledge of
the client's culture rather than rely on the client to explain his or her
understanding of his or her culture. Also, "[psychologists [should] respect
clients' religious and/or spiritual beliefs and values, including attributions
and taboos, since they affect world view, psychosocial functioning, and
expressions of distress" (APA, 1993a, p. 46).
In its entirety, this document is very important, as it outlines the
importance of consideration of bias or racism; cultural belief and value
systems; family-member and community structures, hierarchies, and cultural
beliefs; resources to be identified in the family; religious and spiritual beliefs;
the role of the psychologist; indigenous beliefs and practices; and inclusion
of religious and spiritual leaders, essentially providing a roadmap to culturally
sensitive practice. It should be required reading for all supervisees and
supervisors.
APA's "Guidelines on Multicultural Counseling Proficiency for Psy-
chologists" (American Psychological Association, Division 45, Society for
the Psychological Study of Ethnic Minority Issues, 2001) focus on racial
and ethnic identity with an articulation of learning objectives and clinical-
training guidelines in the areas of awareness, knowledge, and skills. These
specific guidelines appear user friendly for training, but are not yet empiri-
cally supported.
124 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Ancis and Ladany (2001) proposed domains of multicultural supervision
competencies that are exceptionally useful in guiding supervisors, assessing
supervision, and directing supervisees in the development of competencies.
Ancis and Ladany (2001) proposed domains of supervisor-focused personal
development, supervisee-focused development, skills and interventions, pro-
cess, and outcome evaluation. They described particular competencies in
self-awareness and knowledge of other cultures and worldviews, facilitation
of supervisee diversity identity development, understanding of racism and
oppression as well as indigenous resources and the creation of a climate
that generally facilitates diversity discussion and consideration.
Our Definition of Diversity Competence
Our definition of diversity competency draws on many of the others. We
believe that diversity competency includes incorporation of self-awareness by
both supervisor and supervisee and is an interactive process of the client
or family, supervisee-therapist, and supervisor, using all of their diversity
factors. It entails awareness, knowledge, and appreciation of the interaction
among the client's, supervisee-therapist's, and supervisor's assumptions, val-
ues, biases, expectations, and worldviews; integration and practice of appro-
priate, relevant, and sensitive assessment and intervention strategies and
skills; and consideration of the larger milieu of history, society, and socio-
political variables.
Conceptualizations of Culture
Several frameworks address multiple dimensions of cultural and per-
sonal identity, including those of Phinney (1996), Arredondo and Glauner
(1992), Falicov (1988), and Hays (2001). Moving toward a way of integrating
conceptualization, Phinney (1996) defined ethnicity as consisting of at least
three aspects: (a) cultural values, attitudes, and behaviors distinguishing
ethnic groups; (b) the subjective sense of membership or belonging in an
ethnic group or identity; and (c) experiences associated with minority status,
including powerlessness, discrimination, and prejudice, and ways in which
individuals have responded to these experiences. She urged consideration
of ethnicity not as a categorical variable, but as clusters of dimensions that
affect individuals differently and according to which individuals vary. This
approach is similar in part to that of Falicov (1995), who also advocated a
multidimensional approach to consideration of culture, incorporating the
multitude of other variables influential in identity (e.g., gender, age, and
religion). It would appear that the more we understand and respect difference
and the more training we are able to give to enhance understanding of the
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
125

complexity, the more successful our efforts to build diversity competence
will be.
Arredondo and Glauner (1992) addressed what they described as fixed
and flexible dimensions contributing to identity and worldview. These di-
mensions are within a sociopolitical and historical context. Examples of
fixed dimensions include age, gender, and race, whereas flexible dimensions
include relationship status, hobbies, and educational background.
In contrast, Falicov (1988) described parameters of culture as jointly
forming cultural membership. Her methodology elicits a kind of narrative
regarding life experience in a variety of contexts. Falicov (1988) defined
culture as the following:
[tjhose sets of shared world views and adaptive behaviors derived from
simultaneous membership in a variety of contexts, such as ecological
setting (rural, urban, suburban), religious background, nationality and
ethnicity, social, class, gender-related experiences, minority status, occu-
pation, political leanings, migratory patterns and stage of acculturation,
or values derived from belonging to the same generation, partaking of
single historical moment, or particular ideologies, (p. 336)
Arredondo et al. (1996) provided a comprehensive articulation of di-
mensions of personal identity with a fuller conceptualization of contributing
variables. It is important not to isolate variables such as race or religion,
but instead to provide a framework for consideration of the individual and
the family. It is critical to use a "cultural lens" to approach culture with
respectful curiosity. Falicov (1988) concluded, "Each family is unique pre-
cisely because of its specific ecological niche, which is that combination of
the multiple settings in which it is embedded" (p. 336). "Ecological niche"
refers to the overlapping views, values, power, and access that an individual
experiences and represents a narrative of contexts replacing labels such as
"Black" or "Jewish." Emphasis is on interconnectedness as opposed to differ-
ence or separation of individuals by cultural group. One must consider the
ecological niche of each member of the family, the therapist (trainee), and
the supervisor.
Falicov (1995) described five parameters of culture, to which Wisnia
and Falender (2004) added. Falicov's (1995) parameters are as follows:
• ecological context, or how the family lives and fits in its
environment;
• migration and acculturation, or where the members of the family
came from, why they came, what their respective journeys
entailed, and what their aspirations are;
• family organization or family arrangements and values attached
to that structure;
126 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

• family life cycle, which entails diversity in the developmental
stage and transitions and their cultural patterning;
• The concept of health, healing, and wellness.
We encourage the addition of worldview which may be defined as
including factors such as optimism and pessimism, traditional beliefs,
attitude toward the present, social relations, time, one's relationship with
nature, and living in harmony with nature (Ibrahim & Kahn, 1987). We
also include aspects such as values (e.g., competition versus cooperation,
emotional restraint versus expressiveness), guiding beliefs (e.g., indepen-
dence versus interdependence; control and dominance versus harmony
and deference), epistemology (e.g., cognitive versus affective or combined)
logic (reasoning process), nature of reality (e.g., objective material versus
subjective, spiritual versus material), and one's concept of self (Brown
& Landrum-Brown, 1995). Also direct attention to spirituality and religion
should be highlighted.
We advocate the use of therapist maps (Falicov, 1998) and supervisor
maps to define each of these areas, not simply for the clients but also for
the therapist or supervisee and the supervisor. It helps us to approach
differing attitudes and values. For example, the issue of shared worldviews
is complex. Some research indicates that while even culturally diverse thera-
pists may share a somewhat common worldview, ignorance of differing client
worldviews may result in negative attributions (D. W. Sue & Sue, 1990;
Mahalik, Worthington, & Crump, 1999).
The issue of shared worldviews is increasingly complex. Some research
indicates that although even culturally diverse therapists may share a some-
what common worldview, ignorance of differing client worldviews may result
in negative attributions (Mahalik, Worthington, & Crump, 1999; D. W.
Sue & Sue, 1990)
Hays (2001) proposed a framework that is in some ways similar to
Falicov's (1995) method advocating approach of one's own culture and the
culture of others. Using the acronym "ADDRESSING," the therapist lists
one's own age and generational influences (familial, political, or social
events), developmental or acquired disabilities, religion and spiritual orienta-
tion, ethnicity, socioeconomic status, sexual orientation, indigenous heri-
tage, national origin, and gender. Having completed this self-assessment,
the therapist considers the role of privilege and culture on his or her clinical
work and, finally, the role of values. Then the same process is followed to
address the client's culture, so that similarities and differences between
client and therapist are explored.
Although the two frameworks emphasize slightly different areas of
functioning, they are parallel in their emphasis on comparing the cultural
complexity between the therapist and the client—and, we urge, among
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
127

therapist, client, and supervisor as well, as was advocated by Hird, Cavalieri,
Dulko, Felice, and Ho (2001). M. T. Brown and Landrum-Brown (1995)
also urged comparison of worldview congruence stances in which the client,
supervisee—therapist, and supervisor complement or conflict with each other
with respect to such dimensions as cooperation and competition.
Multicultural supervision is defined as "a supervisor-supervisee rela-
tionship in which there are cultural differences based on race and ethnicity"
(Fukuyama, 1994a, p. 142). Furthermore, the institutional setting and ad-
ministration are operative factors (Peterson, 1991). We suggest including
the client and the complexity of the client's or family's, therapist-
supervisee's, and supervisor's interactive diversity variables with respect to
differences, preconceptions, and interactions in the equation of diversity
supervision.
ACCULTURATION
Acculturation is a factor deemed important to consider in selecting
therapist roles and strategies with clients of racial or ethnic minorities
(Atkinson, Thompson, & Grant, 1993). Brislin (2000, derived from Berry,
1990) described acculturation as whether (a) the family retains selected
aspects of its first culture and (b) the family pursues relations with members
of the donor or host culture. If a family has achieved cultural "integration,"
it has done both (a) and (b). If a family has become "assimilated," it has
done only (b). If a family is culturally "separated," it has done only (a).
Finally, if a family is marginalized, it has done neither (a) nor (b). Another
way of looking at acculturation is through the lens of ethnic identity, as a
bidirectional process, with dimensions of degree of adoption of "Whiteness"
and retention of one's other ethnic identity (Sodowsky, Kwan, & Pannu,
1995). The family's country of origin may be somewhat less important than
where it is in this conceptual frame of assimilation, which encompasses
ethnic identity. Acculturation across family members may be variable, with
children's perceptions of their parents' acculturation (or relative lack
thereof) affecting family acculturation conflict and acculturation stress. This
point was highlighted by Roysircar-Sodowsky and Maestas (2000) as conflicts
arising among traditional family kinship, traditional familial obligations, and
deference to authority figures confronted with Westernized individualism,
autonomy, egalitarianism, and assertiveness. Conflict can be intrapersonal
as well, reflected in identity crisis, guilt, and anger. Greater complexity is
added by the concept of "situational acculturation," which refers to the
phenomenon of different acculturation responses, depending on the situa-
tional context (Trimble, 2003).
128 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Formulation of acculturation status is very relevant for both trainees
and supervisors. This factor should be another demographic dimension to
put into the formulation of culture of supervisor, supervisee, and client (or
family) in the context of strengths of each. Interestingly, Handelsman,
Gottlieb, and Knapp (2002) applied Berry's (1990) cultural acculturation
model to professional acculturation, or the socialization of trainees to inte-
grate their personal morality with professional ethical standards so that they
may acquire an ethical identity (see chap. 8, this volume).
EMIC PARAMETERS AND THEIR RELEVANCE TO TRAINING
Part of the difficulty of diversity competency lies in striking a balance
between stereotyping and cultural knowledge. Understanding emic versus
etic factors is essential to achieving this goal. An example of an emic factor
is the concept of personalismo, or having a personal relationship with an
individual, which is important in some Latino cultures. Another example
is familialism—that is, emphasis on and value placed on family over the
individual—a significant protective factor (Santisteban & Mitrani, 2003).
Yet another example is nonverbal communication, including nuances of
eye contact, how close individuals stand to each other during conversation,
and other nonverbal cues that may have significant cultural loading. Turn
exchange, or alternating dialogue typical of individuals conversing, may be
uncomfortable for individuals from Latino or Asian cultural groups to engage
in within therapy, as they may attribute a dominant role to the therapist and
feel uncomfortable verbalizing in that cadence. They may also experience
discomfort with the depth of disclosure required in initial intakes, especially
if the expectation is a single-session intake. It may be that a longer time
is required to establish rapport and proceed. The "I" emphasis in Eurocentric
therapies may be problematic as well. A relationship or family focus rather
than a focus on the individual may be more culturally syntonic for individuals
from certain ethnic groups (Nwachuku & Ivey, 1991). Takushi and Uomoto
(2001) urged consideration of environmental cues, including the general
"cultural competence" of the setting, determined by factors such as the
pictures on the wall of the counseling area and the ethnicities and languages
highlighted by the magazines presented in the waiting area. Other areas of
cultural incongruity may exist in the time orientation of the therapy: past,
present, or future. However, to take any of the foregoing observations as
set in stone would be stereotyping. Instead, knowledge can be used to provide
a frame for reflection or to begin interpersonal understanding. Intensive
coursework, reading, discussion, and multicultural life and therapy experi-
ence are necessities to increase one's cultural comprehension.
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
129

Client-Therapist Factors
There are numerous other examples of emic factors that are important
to training, as they relate to the client-therapist interaction. Supervisees
should thus receive training on verbal and nonverbal taboos, areas fraught
with misunderstanding, and variables that could positively affect therapy and
outcome. An individual's understanding of emic parameters has a profound
influence on his or her assumptions and belief systems, which influence, for
example, whether a family enters treatment or whether a trainee can synthe-
size his or her own beliefs with those of psychological pedagogy. As a result,
seemingly simple concepts are very complex. For example, it is counterpro-
ductive to ask an American Indian, "How are you?", as this question has
an ever-changing answer and is thus not culturally possible to evaluate
(Trimble, 1991). With African American clients, it is essential to show
genuine respect for complaints of racism, discrimination, and the underlying
cultural mistrust, to avoid negative bias in diagnosis and ensuing treatment
by professionals (Whaley, 2001). With Asian Americans, public verbal
expression of feelings, a hallmark of traditional therapy, can be culturally
discordant, as can focusing on painful, negative thoughts or feelings. Credi-
bility of the therapist was found to be the best, and only, predictor of intent
to use therapy for Chinese students, whereas empathic involvement and
credibility were crucial for Caucasians. Credibility could be affected by
problem conceptualization, means for problem resolution, and treatment
goals formulated. Each of these factors needs to be compatible with the
client's belief system and family structure (Zane & Sue, 1991). A symptom-
focused approach, endemic to mental health, may be incongruent with how
parents of some cultural groups look at children's problems. For example,
behavior (e.g., truancy or school failure) may be the family's focus, not
feelings of anger or depression (Cauce et al., 2002). Similarly, there are
variations across cultures in "distress thresholds" for mental health problems
(Weisz & Weiss, 1991). Other critical issues to consider include emic-etic
distinctions in clinical conceptualization, nonverbal communication, disclo-
sure depth, time, and general environmental cues (Takushi & Uomoto,
2001).
Supervision Factors
Emic factors relating to the supervisor-supervisee interaction have
been discussed much less frequently (M. T. Brown & Landrum-Brown,
1995). Suggested dimensions include value placed on verbal communication,
which is central to traditional supervisory roles; ways language systems are
similar or different, and response to the power differential and social- and
economic-status imbalances (M. T. Brown & Landrum-Brown, 1995). Exam-
130 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

pies of factors given by Ryan and Hendricks (1989) include cognitive orienta-
tion, or patterns of thinking and problem solving; motivational orienta-
tion, including the role of rewards and emphasis of locus of control; and
value orientation, including family-versus-group and hierarchical-versus-
egalitarian approaches. It is useful to consider all of the areas on the amended
Falicov (1995) framework, which allows one to compare the respective life
experiences of client or family, supervisee, and supervisor as a way of process-
ing and formulating proposed interventions and the emotional response to
these interventions. Putting the Falicov dimensions together with develop-
mental frameworks of ethnic-identity development would provide even bet-
ter means to understand the factors operating in the relationship. Consider,
for example, a Latino trainee assigned to a Latino case by a White supervisor.
The supervisor's expectation may be that the trainee and client or family
will have much in common. However, the trainee may be a third-generation
American who does not speak Spanish or identify with the Latino culture
and has feelings of insecurity about this. The expectations of the supervisor
and the family may thus impose a difficult burden on the supervisee—therapist
who is struggling with issues of competence; these issues need to be addressed
in supervision without stereotyping.
It has been suggested that for empirically supported treatments to be
informed by multicultural thought, the treatments need to be decontextua-
lized, to determine the cultural basis for the intervention, and then recontex-
tualized according to relevant cultural features of the particular group (Quin-
tana & Atkinson, 2002). To engage in this process, one would need to be
well versed in emic understanding. Examples are available in Ancis (2004).
GENDER AND SEXUAL ORIENTATION IN TRAINING
Training in gender, sexual orientation, gender identity, and effective
services for GLB (Bruss, Brack, Brack, Glickauf-Hughes, & O'Leary, 1997;
Phillips & Fischer, 1998) and transgender clients (Carroll & Gilroy, 2002)
has been neglected as well, although Murphy, Rawlings, and Howe (2002)
raised the concern that perhaps training in GLB issues has not been ade-
quately assessed and may be somewhat better than reported. Gender role
identity may vary within and among cultural groups (Fassinger & Richie,
1997). The first step in addressing this area is to enhance supervisor self-
awareness with respect to them so that supervisors take GLB issues into
account when modeling for and training supervisees. Bruss et al. (1997)
advocated a combination of didactic learning, encouragement of trainee
independence in grappling with their value structure and possible homopho-
bia, and ultimately learning to use "self-as-an-instrument" (p. 70). In the
integration process, defenses are lowered and more self-disclosure can occur.
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
13 1

When working with a GLB trainee, one should not assume that the trainee
will face no issues when working with the GLB population (Buhrke &
Douce, 1991). Porter (1985) advocated exploration of internalized misogy-
nist attitudes and described that facet as the most difficult part of feminist
supervision. Understanding how one's own sexism or other prejudices affect
one's work with clients is essential.
Biases revealed in an APA study of therapy with lesbians and gay men
(Fassinger & Richie, 1997; Garnets et al., 1991) include pathologizing in
assessment, focusing on sexual orientation when it is irrelevant, lacking
understanding of identity development and the impact of its disclosure
on others, minimizing the importance of same-sex intimate relationships,
attributing poor parenting to sexual orientation, relying on the client for
education, and teaching inaccurate information. One may not be conscious
of one's own biases and stereotypes (Stevens-Smith, 1995), so great scrutiny
is necessary.
Although more attention has been devoted to female gender issues,
it is not correct to assume that male gender issues are less important.
Introduction of feminist theories of supervision (Cummings, 2000; Porter,
1985), male socialization and its impact on the male as a therapist, gender
pairing, and a general enhancement of awareness are all essential to diversity-
sensitive training. Traditional patterns of male socialization, including a
focus on independence and self-reliance, restriction of emotional expressiv-
ity, and toughness and aggression as coping styles, have specific consequences
in psychology training programs (Wester & Vogel, 2002). Consequences of
gender role conflict, a result of male socialization, might include the trigger-
ing of countertransference or interference by discussion of transference and
countertransference phenomena. Wester and Vogel (2002) advocated foster-
ing historical understanding, forging understanding of socialization, and
encouraging male challenging of those aspects of their own socialization
that are problematic to practice of psychology and supervisory relationships
while balancing encouragement of aspects fostering successful practice.
Feminist supervision theory provides a model in which the power
differential is minimized. According to this theory, those in power create
meaning; reducing their power causes the context to change. As in solution-
focused therapy, where the client is the expert and is empowered, the
supervisee is empowered. Supervision exists within the context of relation-
ship, enabling the supervisor to challenge the therapist with respect and to
value emotional reactions (Prouty, 2001). Contracting is used to increase
shared responsibility (Zimmerman & Haddock, 2001).
Higher levels of overall supervisory satisfaction were associated with
discussion of gender and sexual-orientation similarities and differences in
supervision (return rate, 36%; Gatmon et al., 2001). However, very low
levels of such discussion occurred or were initiated by supervisors. It is the
132 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

obligation of supervisors to keep abreast of changing demographics and
dynamics. For example, in recent times, there is greater fluidity in gender
and sexual identities in the gay male, lesbian, bisexual, and transgendered
(GLBT) communities, and there is less identification of lesbian culture
with feminism (DeAngelis, 2002). Current research directs trainees and
supervisors to think of sexuality as a continuum with fluidity, not as sets of
dichotomies or singular nouns (Reynolds & Hanjorgiris, 2000).
An interesting continuum between therapist attitudes and behavior
toward GLB clients has been described. At one end are therapists with
positive attitudes toward GLB clients; at the other extreme are therapists
with negative attitudes, who have adopted judgmental or ignoring stances.
However, even low levels of homophobia were associated with counselor
avoidance of the topic of sexual orientation (Mohr, 2002). The outcome
of avoidance of sexual orientation is a very serious consequence of thera-
pist attitudes.
It is important to understand working models of sexual orientation.
Heterosexuals may view individuals of all sexual orientations as essentially
the same, where the only differences lie in the objects of sexual attraction
and lifestyle. This approach is vulnerable to stereotyping and ignores differ-
ences in privilege, leading to assumptions by therapists that all clients are
heterosexual. In compulsory heterosexuality, heterosexuality is the only
acceptable sexual orientation, a view leading to the stigmatization of GLB
individuals. It has been suggested that the most challenging aspect of work-
ing with GLB clients is dealing with the invisibility of the client's sexual
orientation (Reynolds & Hanjorgiris, 2000). Thus, for a client with multiple
identities—for example, GLB and another minority status (e.g., Latino,
Black Hispanic, or African American)—the complexity and the likelihood
of the therapist's focusing on only one of these factors, rather than multiple
factors, increases.
Mohr (2002) proposed a series of supervisory questions to facilitate
the competence of heterosexual supervisees in conducting therapy with
GLB populations. These questions address the dominant working models
that both supervisor and supervisee hold regarding sexual orientation and
how these models might lead to errors or misconceptions.
TRAINING ISSUES IN DISABILITIES
The Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 defines an individual's
having a disability as
• having a physical or mental impairment that substantially limits
one or more major life activities of such individual;
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
133

• having a record of such an impairment; or
• being regarded as having such impairment.
People with disabilities include individuals with limitations in walking,
sight, hearing, speaking, learning, thinking, concentrating, or working; indi-
viduals who have a history of any of these limitations; individuals who
experienced alcohol or substance addiction, but are in recovery; or individu-
als who suffer from any other type of impairment, such as facial scarring.
There is a dearth of training for psychologists in working with clients who
have disabilities, and APA has identified less than 2% of its membership
as individuals with disabilities (Olkin, 2002). As a result, training programs
provide little interaction with disabled individuals, even though approxi-
mately 15% of the U.S. population is disabled, making people with disabili-
ties the largest minority group in the United States (Olkin, 2002). Olkin
(2002) noted that the number of clinical-psychology graduate courses on
disability decreased from 1989 to 1999: 24% of graduate programs offered
disability courses in 1989, compared with 11% in 1999. In addition, the
courses that were offered focused on cognitive impairment rather than
physical, sensory, or psychiatric disabilities. As a result, "most able-bodied
therapists are doing cross-cultural counseling with clients with disabilities
without requisite training" (Olkin, 2002, p. 132). An additional unfortunate
consequence is that inadequate evaluations are produced by mental health
professionals who fail to understand disabilities or lack familiarity with the
Americans With Disabilities Act of 1990 (Goodman-Delahunty, 2000).
Specific prior training in disabilities results in more positive attitudes toward
clients and prioritizing of extraneous variables in treatment, compared with
treatment by therapists without such training (Kemp & Mallinckrodt, 1996).
AGE AS A DIVERSITY FACTOR
It has been predicted that, by the year 2020, more than 20% of the
U.S. population will be over age 65. APA members surveyed (41% return
rate) reported small numbers working with geriatric patients and little formal
training (Quails et al., 2002). As a result, aging and geriatric considerations
will be significant for psychology training, as will combinations of all of the
diversity factors with aging. Molinari et al. (2003) provided guidelines and
recommendations regarding knowledge and skills required to work with
these populations. These authors addressed seven competency areas, includ-
ing normal aging, specialized assessment, diagnostic and treatment considera-
tions, communication and interdisciplinary work, and special ethical con-
cerns. Because of the significant constellations of cognitive physiological
changes and negative life events unique to the population, specialized train-
ing is essential.
134 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

WHAT ENHANCES DIVERSITY COMPETENCE?
The study of a supervisee's abilities to conceptualize clients from a
multicultural perspective has been neglected (Ladany, Inman, Constantine,
& Hofheinz, 1997). Influences on interns' multicultural awareness has been
studied following the finding that expression of the trainee's own perspectives
and personal experiences increases the trainee's knowledge and skills, but is
only slightly related to awareness on the Multicultural Counseling Awareness
Scale (Pope-Davis, Reynolds, Dings, & Ottavi, 1994).
There is evidence that having had supervised training cases with indi-
viduals from a particular cultural group is associated with higher ratings of
self-competence with that particular group (Allison et al., 1996). Ponterotto,
Fuertes, and Chen (2000) concluded that personal experience combined with
educational or training diversity experience results in higher competency
scores. That is, life experience with diversity—one's own experiences and
awareness and those of friends and family—combined with the formal training
experience raises one's diversity competence. Pope-Davis et al. (1994) re-
ported that supervision in a multicultural-counseling situation, completion
of multicultural workshops, and a greater amount of multicultural coursework
cumulatively contribute to greater knowledge and skills. However, Ladany,
Inman, et al. (1997) found no relationship between multicultural case con-
ceptualization skills and the trainee's completion of a graduate-level course
on multicultural issues or experience with multiethnic clients. The area of
outcome assessment in multicultural competence, and its impact on client
outcome, requires substantial investigation, including whether particular
coursework or experience enhances multicultural competency.
Another preliminary finding is that general-counseling competence
may be an overlapping or predictive factor of multicultural-counseling
competence: "The presence of multicultural competence is synonymous
with general counseling competence" (Coleman, 1998, p. 153). Attempts
by the therapist to present as culturally neutral resulted in clients'
perceptions that the therapist had a lower level of general-counseling
competence (Coleman, 1998). These findings are supported by Constantine
(2002), who reported an approximate 60% shared variance between clients'
perceptions of counselors' general-counseling competence and clients' per-
ceptions of counselors' multicultural-counseling competence. These findings
indicate that one cannot be an effective therapist unless one is multicultur-
ally competent.
Constantine (2002) suggested that competence factors are even more
critical to clients of color. Although Fuertes and Brobst (2002) found a
50% overlap between general-counseling competency (defined as conveyed
empathy and trustworthiness) and multicultural-counseling competency,
multicultural-counseling competency accounted for a significant portion of
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
135

client satisfaction only for the ethnic-minority sample. In evaluation of the
potential impact of multicultural-counseling training on White graduate-
level trainees, the trainees demonstrated sustained increases in understand-
ing of racism and Whiteness, identification of a nonracist definition of
"White," and increased appreciation for multiculturalism after 45 hours of
didactics and supplemental reading. The trainees reported that the most
influential parts of the training were panels, guest speakers, and presentations,
videotapes, and class discussion (Neville et al., 1996), with an emphasis on
the opportunity to interact with racially and ethnically different individuals.
Also, the more extensive the multicultural-counseling training that the
White counseling trainees had received, the more differentiated were the
ratings of culturally sensitive versus culturally insensitive videotapes of ses-
sions and the more receptive were the trainees to the introduction of race
as a critical issue (Steward et al., 1998). There is evidence that Black
American and Latino American counseling trainees score higher than
Whites on multicultural competency self-assessments, perhaps because of
the salience of these issues in their lives (Constantine, 2001; Sodowsky,
Kuo-Jackson, Richardson, & Corey, 1998). Increased intensive and personal
understanding of individuals' cultural journeys and spiritual issues (Polanski,
2003), engenders more respect and competence in trainees. Also, the ele-
ments of knowledge of and self-respect for one's own cultural background
constitute a core requirement of cultural competence. Paradigms for achiev-
ing this result will be discussed later in the chapter.
As previous multicultural training is predictive of self-assessment
and other ratings of therapist multicultural competence, greater urgency
is placed on the tasks of definition, conceptualization, and implementation
of training to enhance multicultural competency (Constantine, 2001;
Neville et al., 1996). Despite these findings, Gatmon et al. (2001) reported
very low rates (12.5 to 37.9%) of actual discussion of ethnicity, gender,
and sexual orientation in supervision, and a lack of initiation of such
discussions by supervisors (response rate 36%). Initiation of discussion
of race and other diversity issues is a supervisory competence. However,
perceptions of whether these issues arise in supervision may differ between
supervisee and supervisor. In a study of counseling-center cross-racial
supervisory dyads (all containing one Caucasian member), over 93% of
supervisors claimed that they had admitted to supervisees that they lacked
cross-racial supervisory experience, but only 50% of the supervisees
acknowledged being told. There were also differences in perceptions of
supervisors' initiating discussions of cultural differences and of supervisors'
efforts to understand the culture of the supervisee. Supervisees sensed
that supervisors liked, valued, and respected them less than supervisors
reported (Duan & Roehlke, 2001).
136 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

DEVELOPMENT OF MULTICULTURAL COMPETENCE
Supervisees
To understand the development of multicultural competence, one
should consider multiple developmental theories: (a) the developmental
model of multicultural-counseling competence (Carney & Kahn, 1984);
(b) stages of effective multicultural supervision (Priest, 1994); (c) racial
consciousness identity (Atkinson, Morten, & Sue, 1993; Helms, 1990;
Sabnani et al., 1991); and (d) nonoppressive interpersonal development
(Ancis & Ladany, 2001). In a developmental model paralleling those dis-
cussed in chapter 2 (this volume), Carney and Kahn (1984) proposed five
stages of supervisee development of multicultural-counseling competence.
In Stage 1, the supervisee has little knowledge of multicultural counseling
and operates on assumptions based on ethnocentric attitudes. The supervisor
focuses on structured and supportive approaches, trainee self-exploration,
and exploration of how the client has been affected by membership in his
cultural, ethnic, and racial group. Confrontation is avoided. In Stage 2, the
supervisee's awareness of ethnocentric attitudes and behaviors is increased,
but he or she still has a limited understanding of how the client's and
counselor's level of development affects the therapy process. Carney and
Kahn (1984) referred to this limited understanding as the "halo of
naivete" (p. 114), as the trainee has acquired elementary knowledge and
may accordingly grow overconfident in his or her own perceived cultural
competence. (This factor might account for the elevated self-ratings of
cultural competence in trainee studies for which there is no correlation
with multicultural conceptualization.) The supervisory task is to continue
to provide a supportive and structured environment that builds the
trainee's knowledge about barriers impeding intercultural communication,
looks at ethnocentric belief structures, and examines client-held world-
views that differ from those of the trainee. Dissonance created in this
stage may propel trainees toward Stage 3 or cause them to remain at
Stage 2 through increasing resistance to change. In Stage 3, supervisees
exhibit conflicting emotions about working with culturally different clients.
They want to work in a respectful, culturally sensitive way, but are
limited by their own biases, value conflicts, and previous training. This
factor may result in a downplaying of the importance of race and culture.
Supervisors are encouraged to support the trainees in their frustration,
acknowledge their own awareness of the dissonance, and encourage
incorporation of new cultural knowledge and skills. Supervisors may
emphasize transformation of prejudice about cultural differences to respect
through education and exposure.
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
137

At Stage 4, supervisees internalize a new professional identity as a com-
petent multicultural therapist with validation of the worldview of others. They
are in the process of incorporating their own ethnic-racial identity with an
understanding of that of the client. At this stage, supervisors assist supervisees
in understanding their own impact on clients and integrating all the operative,
but disparate, components of culture. Supervisees should be taking a lead in
supervision discussions of the rationale for particular culturally competent
interventions. During Stage 5, supervisees advocate for the rights of individu-
als from diverse groups and take actions to promote and protect cultural plural-
ism and social equality. The supervisor moves to more of a consultant role. In
this capacity, the supervisor assists in clarifying personal commitment and
action strategies and understanding how to be an effective agent of change.
Although this model is developmentally based (a la Stoltenberg et al.,
1998, for example), it omits the designation of the supervisor's level of
cultural competency and the relationship of the myriad cultural variables
of the client-supervisee-supervisor constellation. However, it is explicative
of the finding that multicultural issues are integrated into conceptualizations
later in training; it the rare novice who completes this process (J. M. Bernard,
1994; Falender, 2001).
Supervisors
Priest (1994) described stages for achieving effective multicultural
supervision competency. The first stage is the supervisor's denial of cultural
differences that affect supervision. The second stage is the supervisor's recog-
nition that differences exist, but a lack of competence about what to do
about it, possibly resulting in the supervisor's feeling overwhelmed. In stage
three, the supervisor makes an attempt to identify similarities and differences
among cultures that affect the supervisory relationship. In stage four, the
supervisor determines where he or she fits in the cultural framework. In
stage five, the supervisor develops a beginning appreciation of cultural dis-
tinctiveness, resulting in an enhanced supervisory process. In stage six, the
supervisor can formulate methodologies that are respectful of the supervisee's
culture and interaction while acquiring new skills. The client or family is
not directly considered in this framework; however, this set of stages provides
a useful outline for supervisors who are moving through the acquisition of
cultural competence.
RACIAL AND IDENTITY DEVELOPMENT
Awareness of one's own racial identity and ethnocentric biases has
been described as a developmental task (Sabnani et al., 1991) and as critical
J38 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

in understanding multicultural supervision (D'Andrea & Daniels, 1997).
Most of the literature has focused on White and Black or African American
identity development, overlooking the preponderance of other cultural
groups. We now describe a model of White racial-identity development and
a model of Minority Identity Development. The White racial-identity model
put forth by Sabnani et al. (1991) provides an integration of previous models
and a progression through stages. Cognizance of the supervisee and supervisor's
stage of development is an oft forgotten ingredient of multicultural compe-
tence, accentuated by the fact that White individuals are at varying levels of
readiness to assimilate multicultural training. Stage 1 is preexposure/precon-
tact, which requires cultural emic knowledge acquisition and beginning etic
counseling skills. Stage 2 is the conflict stage, in which the individual
confronts the dilemma of conforming to White norms while upholding
humanitarian values and beliefs. This stage requires a greater understanding
of prejudice and racism and their emotional impact, definition of barriers
to counseling, and development of counseling techniques more appropriate
to individuals in particular cultural groups. Stage 3 is marked by a prominor-
ity and antiracism stance through which paternal attitudes of Whites are
scrutinized; this stage requires cultural immersion and study. Role-playing
and communication skills training are advocated in this stage as well. In
Stage 4, "Retreat into White Culture," the focus is on fear or anger elicited
during Stage 3. Emphasis on etic over emic approaches may facilitate dealing
with the negative feelings aroused. Stage 5, or "Redefinition and Integra-
tion," entails the integration of "Whiteness" and its value as part of the
supervisee or supervisor's identity. Enhanced respect for varying worldviews
and deepening of culturally emic approaches are indicated. Sabnani et al.
(1991) provided references for skill development exercises.
The model for Minority Identity Development (Atkinson et al., 1993)
describes stages of integrating dominant White or Western values with
the values of one's own racial group. Initially, at the "Conformity Stage,"
individuals prefer values and norms of the dominant group and express self-
deprecating attitudes about their own ethnic—racial group as well as other
non-White groups. They choose White colleagues to relate to, as they
depreciate the value of the non-Whites. Moving to the "Resistance/
Immersion Stage," there is an increase in ethnic pride and positivity com-
bined with increased suspicion of White Americans. Next, in the "Syner-
gistic Stage," a sense of self-fulfillment is associated with the individual's
own ethnic, cultural, or racial identity, but the individual does not achieve
a complete acceptance of all aspects. He or she may become an activist
against oppression and discrimination, and the supervisor is well served to
communicate respect for the synergy.
Dominance appears to be a significant difference between these two
models. In the White racial-identity development model, one moves from
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
139

ethnocentrism and overvaluing one's own culture to greater cultural aware-
ness and integration, whereas in the minority racial-identity development
model, movement is from overadoption of White values toward integration
of one's own cultural identity. In the White model, the individual is overly
dominant and wears blinders to others, whereas in the minority model, the
individual is overly nondominant and wears blinders to his or her own
culture, ethnicity, or race.
Helms (1990) proposed a way to conceptualize racial-identity develop-
ment as a cognitive development continuum. There are two phases: Phase 1
involves relatively less complex strategies and lower levels of racial-identity
development. Ethnocentrism and conformity are elements of this phase.
Phase 2 involves more complex strategies and higher levels of racial-identity
development. This phase includes elements such as resistance, pseudoinde-
pendence, immersion, and autonomy. This continuum may be a particularly
useful way of conceptualizing the development of trainees, as it takes into
account the cognitive complexity and ability to integrate disparate informa-
tion, concepts, and feelings.
Ancis and Ladany (2001) described a model of nonoppressive interper-
sonal development that integrates some of the previously discussed themes.
In this model, levels of identity are integrated with respect to multiple
demographic variables. There is also a strong emotional component to the
responses. Individuals are identified as belonging to a socially oppressed
group or a socially privileged group. Some individuals might belong to both
types of group, based on different demographic variables (e.g., sex and
socioeconic status). At the heart of the theory is a progression through
developing "means of interpersonal functioning," (p. 67) or thoughts, feel-
ings, and behaviors based on feelings toward self and identification with
particular demographic factors. The first level of interpersonal functioning
is adaptation, or conformity, complacency, and apathy with a very superficial
understanding of cultural difference; stereotyping attitudes; and limited emo-
tional awareness. This stage is marked by denial and resistance. In the
supervision context, supervisors in this stage minimize the trainee's expres-
sion of multicultural competence, use inaccurate stereotypes, and perceive
themselves as multiculturally competent. They have very limited ability to
integrate multicultural factors into the conceptualization, to address issues
of culture within the supervisor-supervisee or supervisee-client relationship,
and to assess strengths or weaknesses in this area. Supervisees at the adapta-
tion level ignore the environment and miss cultural influences and issues
that substantially affect client behavior. The second stage is incongruence,
or a feeling that previously held beliefs of privilege and oppression are
inconsistent with their experience. Minimization and rationalization are
the operant defense mechanisms, and there are still remnants of the adapta-
tion phase, such as stereotyping. Movement to this level could be precipitated
140 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

by a major event in which one could not longer overlook oppression.
For supervisors in this phase, minimal, but some, attention is devoted to
multicultural aspects. Supervisees may be aware of multicultural issues, but
do not directly raise them in supervision. The third stage, exploration, is
marked by anger regarding recognition of oppression, guilt and shame for
not having seen it before, and increased insight. Ancis and Ladany (2001)
emphasized that the following problem may occur in this stage of the
supervisor-supervisee fit: As the supervisor increasingly raises multicultural
issues, a supervisee in the adaptation or incongruence stage will resist. They
cautioned that the zeal of this stage may result in an overemphasis on
cultural factors. In the fourth and final stage, integration, proficiency and
insight occur. Multicultural formulations are integrated into conceptualiza-
tions. Trainees use accurate empathy, analyze their own biases, and separate
countertransference from transference phenomena.
Ancis and Ladany (2001) described supervisor-supervisee interactions
in terms of whether each member is at the same or a different level or stage
of development. The most effective combination in terms of client outcome,
they posited, is when both are in the exploration or integration phase. The
next best combination occurs when the trainee, at the integration level, is
more advanced than the supervisor, at the adaptation level. They suggested
that this combination may be the most frequent constellation at present. It is
unclear exactly how the privilege or oppression on the part of the supervisor
or supervisee plays out in the framework. Also, it seems that there is an
abundance of other motivators to progress in sophistication beyond critical
incidents. These motivators might include continuing education, clinical
material, or personal life experience. In addition, it would be ideal if a model
of development could also encompass the client or family, including their
level of acculturation and their ethnic—racial—cultural identity.
All of the models that have been proposed fail to fully integrate trainee
development of multicultural competence with that of the supervisor, as
well as the multicultural competence reflected in the relationship (Ancis
& Ladany, 2001). A major limitation is thinking that, to become culturally
competent, one need only acquire knowledge and skills. "One cannot merely
memorize cultural competence, but must learn and demonstrate it through
a variety of active self-involving strategies and procedures" (Helms &
Richardson, 1997, p. 69). Instead, one needs to assess the impact of cultural
and racial attitudes of the therapist on the client—therapist interaction
(Sodowsky et al, 1994).
The proposed models also lack empirical support and consideration of
personality dynamics (Leong & Wagner, 1994) and are not typically con-
cerned with the triad of client, supervisee (therapist), and supervisor, all of
whom may be from different ethnic, racial, socioeconomic status, accultura-
tion, religious, gender, gender-identity, and age categories.
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
141

Leong and Wagner (1994) concluded that we know very little about
cross-cultural counseling supervision. However, they determined that empir-
ical support has confirmed the following:
1. Race can profoundly influence supervision, including trainee
expectations for supervisor "empathy, respect, and congru-
ence" (p. 128).
2. Race can influence the supervisee's perception of whether the
supervisor likes him or her.
3. Under some circumstances, race does not appear to influ-
ence supervision.
They resolved that we still need to know whether the evolution of
cross-cultural supervision is in fact a developmental process and how specific
the process is to race. That is, can we use a culture-general model, or do
we need specific models for each racial—ethnic pair? Cook (1994) suggested
that pairing of supervisors and supervisees with differing levels of racial-
identity attitudes may lead to power differentials that result in lesser or
greater expression and competency in "racial acknowledgement" (p. 136),
especially if the acknowledgment remains unspoken and intellectualized.
Cook (1994) encouraged more routine discussion of race of all (supervisee,
supervisor, and client) participants in supervision.
STEPS TOWARD SUPERVISORY COMPETENCE
To achieve multicultural competency, one must complete a series of
steps. First is the determination of the supervisor's self-competency, the com-
petency of the program and site, and the supervisee's level of cultural compe-
tency. As described in the section on competency in ethics and legal consider-
ations in chapter 7, it is incumbent on the supervisor to ascertain his or her
own level of cultural and diversity competence. It is difficult, if not impossible,
simply to remove oneself from supervision for clients in categories with which
one feels less competent in a community setting. Therefore, the onus is on
the supervisor to increase his or her cultural and diversity competence.
Program Assessment
Assessing the programmic "internal climate" (Suzuki et al., 2001,
p. 848), including faculty, students, and administrators, is an essential step.
An environment of openness with attitudes, values, and behaviors that
exemplify administrative and clinical faculty support for respectful, culturally
competent interchanges is desired (Priest, 1994). Challenges, input, and
questions relating to culture are encouraged.
142 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

A tool for assessment of multicultural-counseling training settings, at
least structurally, can be administered (D'Andrea & Daniels, 1991). The
stages into which training settings are classified are "Culturally Entrenched,"
where multicultural training is rarely incorporated; "Cross-Cultural Awaken-
ing," where there is a developing awareness and some discussion of issues;
"Cultural Integrity," where increased attention is given to culture and there
are separate courses on various issues related to culture; and "Infusion,"
where multiculturalism is integrated into the whole curriculum. D'Andrea
and Daniels (1991) found most counseling programs to be at the Cross-
Cultural Awakening stage, although some programs were assessed to be at
the Cultural Integrity or Infusion stage. This model provides a structure for
determining a starting point and an aspirational end point for achieving
cultural competency. It is reminiscent of Lefley's (1986) concern that train-
ing could be additive (new concepts are added to the standard clinical
training), substitutive (new concepts replace traditional clinical content),
or integrative (new concepts are integral to mental health training). Those
who argue that they do not have space or time to add so many new compo-
nents like cultural competency are missing the point of the integrative
curriculum.
Alternatively, the Multicultural Competency Checklist (see Appen-
dix E), developed for counseling-psychology programs, includes considera-
tion of minority representation (a minimum benchmark of 30% racial-
and ethnic-minority students, faculty, and staff), curricular issues (the
addressing of multicultural issues in coursework and evaluation), counseling
practice and supervision (competency promoted through training and
supervision experiences), research (faculty research on multiculturalism
being conducted and encouraged), student and faculty competency evalua-
tion (staff and trainees being evaluated on multiculturally competent
behavior), and physical environment (an environment reflective of multi-
cultural appreciation) (Ponterotto, Alexander, & Grieger, 1995). Because
of the importance of student and faculty diversity, and the broader
spectrum this checklist analyzes, it would be useful to administer it in
internship and other training settings. Both trainees and faculty should
complete it, as there is some concern that student perceptions may differ
from those of faculty members with respect to degree of cultural compe-
tence, with students perceiving less program competency in several areas
(Constantine, Ladany, Inman, &. Ponterotto, 1996).
Individual Multicultural Competency Assessment
Assisting supervisees to assess and work on the development of cultural
self-awareness is an important step. Students feel more comfortable consider-
ing the culture, race, ethnicity, and differences of others than looking at
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
J 43

themselves. They also are more eager to address cognitive-level aspects of
what to do in situations with particular clients of particular ethnicities
(Tomlinson-Clarke, 2000). Flexibility, openness, and adaptability to cultural
difference and nuance seem to be predictors of success in multicultural
competence (Tomlinson-Clarke, 2000).
To obtain at least a preliminary measure of individual multicultural-
counseling competency, one of several measures should be applied for super-
visors as well as supervisees. The Multicultural Awareness Knowledge and
Skills Survey (D*Andrea, Daniels, & Heck, 1991), the Multicultural Coun-
seling Inventory (Sodowsky et al., 1994), the Multicultural Counseling
Knowledge and Awareness Scale (see Appendix D; Ponterotto, Gretchen,
Utsey, Rieger, & Austin, 2002), and the Cross-Cultural Counseling
Inventory—Revised (supervisor report form; see Appendix C; LaFromboise,
Coleman, & Hernandez, 1991) are several that have been reviewed
(Ponterotto & Alexander, 1995). The first three are self-report measures
and have a social-desirability component (Constantine & Ladany, 2000;
R. L. Worthington, Mobley, Franks, Tan, & Andreas, 2000), but perhaps
less social desirability for those who rate themselves as high in multicultural
competence (Ponterotto et al., 2002). That is, those who have high multicul-
tural awareness may have a low need to appear socially desirable (Constant-
ine & Ladany, 2000). Respondents rated themselves as more multiculturally
competent than was reflected in their written multicultural conceptualiza-
tion sophistication (Constantine & Ladany, 2000; Ladany, Inman, et al.,
1997). Social desirability itself has cultural determinants; for example,
Sodowsky et al. (1998) found that Asians generally had higher "multicultural
social desirability" scores than their White, Black, and Hispanic peers.
Sodowsky et al. explained this finding in terms of face saving in social
situations or a desire to be less confrontational. In other words, to avoid
confrontation, Asians in this sample responded as they thought the re-
searcher wanted them to. Constantine and Ladany (2000) suggested use of
the LaFromboise et al. (1991) supervisor-report measure of trainees as an
alternative, assuming that supervisors are culturally competent enough to
assess trainees (Constantine & Ladany, 2001).
Self-reported multicultural competence by trainees was not related to
multicultural case conceptualization, which was contrary to expectation
(Constantine, 2001; Constantine & Ladany, 2000) and may in fact be two
theoretically divergent constructs (Constantine, 2001). Alternatively, self-
reported multicultural-competence ratings might reflect anticipated rather
than actual competency (Constantine, 2001). However, in an analog study,
R. L. Worthington et al. (2000) reported a positive correlation between
multicultural verbal content (verbal reference to culture, race, ethnicity,
and other factors relating to culture, environment, and social conditions)
and higher scores on the LaFromboise et al. (1991) scale, rated by graduate
144 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

student judges based on transcripts of counselor verbal responses. For supervi-
sors, it is important not to rely solely on supervisee self-report (Ladany,
Inman, et al., 1997). The R. L. Worthington et al. (2000) study provides
a potential methodology for describing multicultural competency in verbal
content. As Torres-Rivera, Phan, Maddux, Wilbur, and Garrett (2001)
summarized, multicultural competence involves self-knowledge of cultural
(diversity) heritage; knowledge of how these personal factors affect attitudes,
values, and beliefs related to the therapy process; recognition of limitations
of one's own multicultural competency; and recognition of sources and
instances of discomfort relating to clients of differing backgrounds. A more
flexible worldview, a sense of personal adequacy, and belief in societal
combating of racism are all associated with multicultural competency (So-
dowsky et al., 1998). Constantine and Ladany (2001) proposed that empathy
and interpersonal sensitivity may be correlates of multicultural counseling
competence. Although there is need for additional reliability, validity, stan-
dardization, and treatment outcome data (Ponterotto & Alexander, 1995),
it is still valuable to use one or more of the aforementioned measures to
establish a baseline understanding of cultural competency and to begin to
discuss and integrate culture into the training curriculum.
Another possible assessment device that has been proposed is portfolios,
or collections of work (videos of sessions, reports, etc.) demonstrating the
development of competence, even though they have been criticized as
lacking in reliability in evaluation and as extremely time consuming (Cole-
man, 1997; Constantine &. Ladany, 2001).
MULTICULTURAL-COMPETENCY IMPLEMENTATION
Once the cultural competency of a program, supervisor, and supervisee
has been assessed, the next step is to implement a program to enhance
competencies to reach the Infusion stage posited by D'Andrea and Daniels
(1991). Use of a comprehensive model is imperative, such as the model
defining competencies for multicultural counseling developed by D. W.
Sue et al. (1992) and comprehensively operationalized by Arredondo et al.
(1996). Their model articulates cultural attitudes and beliefs, knowledge,
and skills. The first area of the model encompasses the therapist's awareness
of his or her own cultural values and biases. For example, "Culturally skilled
counselors believe that cultural self-awareness and sensitivity to one's own
cultural heritage is essential" (Arredondo et al., 1996, p. 57). The second
area involves the therapist's awareness of the client's worldview. "Culturally
skilled counselors understand and have knowledge about sociopolitical in-
fluences that impinge on the life of racial and ethnic minorities" (Arredondo
et al., 1996, pp. 64-65). The third area involves culturally appropriate
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
145

intervention strategies. Although the component parts of each area of the
model are operationalized, it is still necessary to translate them into a training
curriculum. As Abreu (2001) concluded, "these conceptualizations do not
clearly suggest the content of training needed to help . . . students achieve
this competency" (p. 488). Fuertes, Mueller, Chauhan, Walker, and Ladany
(2002) suggested an operationalizing step of measuring the introduction of
the discussion of race into the therapeutic interaction at an early point.
Pope-Davis et al. (2002) presented some general direction for training.
They suggested the importance of increasing one's cultural knowledge base;
teaching counselors to disclose intentions and plans to clients, especially
when cultural information is being collected or an intervention is being
planned; training in the use of restraint in making assumptions based on
cultural knowledge, to safeguard against stereotyping. For example, instead
of making a blanket generalization about a cultural group, one could state
the assumption and ask if it is one that applies to the particular client
or family.
Experiential activities, including the labeling exercise (attaching stere-
otypic labels to individuals' backs), making implicit associations to words
associated with race, and pairing up culturally different partners to share
cultural information, have all been suggested (Abreu, 2001).
Wisnia and Falender (1999) described a specific training sequence for
enhancing cultural competency, composed of a series of activities (all of
which is described in program recruitment materials). Initially, several mov-
ies involving cultural passage or cultural assimilation are viewed and dis-
cussed in a Falicov (1995) or Hays (2001) framework. Another activity is
the construction of supervisory and therapist (supervisee) maps such as the
one illustrated in Figure 6.1. The task is to build a prioritized listing of
considerations on the mind of the supervisor when he or she goes into the
supervisory hour. The supervisor is to imagine a trainee with whom he or
she is working and formulate a hierarchy of priorities approaching the
next supervisory hour with that trainee: Exactly what areas of supervisory
intervention are most critical, and in what order are they prioritized? The
trainee constructs his or her own map as well. Then the supervisor and
supervisee can compare these maps and discuss discrepancies and how they
affect the supervisory relationship, the therapeutic relationship, and out-
come. Contrasting priorities may exist for issues of safety, pragmatics, ethics
and legalities, or many other possible considerations, many of which may
be seen through the prism of diversity. Highlighting and discussing personal
views on these issues adds perspective and enhances communication. This
technique may also be useful in assisting a problematic trainee to address
the substantial differences in approach to a particular client's situation.
These maps are supplemental to maps constructed around dimensions
146 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

[Safety of Client, Family and Therapist
[Legal and Ethical Considerations)
[Cultural Overlay: Emic Considerations
^Theoretical Orientation]
Attention to Process Versus Content
View of Therapeutic Process
Role of Therapist
Attention to Past, Present, Integration of Two
Articulation of Treatment Goals
[Transference-Countertransference Considerations]
[Responsiveness to Client]
Cues
Affect
Nonverbal Communication
Process
Cultural Variables
Respect and Perspective Regarding These
Consistent Respect for Boundaries
Focus on Strengths]
Interaction Between Supervisee and Supervisor!
Open
Respectful
Access to and Responsiveness to Therapeutic Data|
Responsiveness to Supervisory Input]
Cultural Respect]
[Looking Ahead
Integration of current data into plan for future intervention
Ability to foresee possible consequences of particular interventions]
and plan ahead]
Look for Matches and Mismatches
Contrast Map of Supervisor with Supervisee and Family/Client
Figure 6.1. An example of supervisor maps constructed by a supervisor.
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
147
