described earlier in this chapter in conceptualizations of culture, the frame-
works of Falicov (1995) and Hays (2001).
Next, the supervisors and supervisees describe an aspect of their own
particular upbringing and personal cultural identification and development
through one of four contexts: Falicov's journey of migration and culture
change, an ecological context, family organization, or transitions in the
structure of family life cycles. The supervisors and supervisees arrange these
presentations around particular cultural variables or identity niches that are
reflective of their cultural identity and comfortable for them to present.
Presenters use food, music, poetry, photographic albums, video, or objects
of significance to share their culture. The processing by the group includes
reactions, expression of feelings elicited, and the forging of a sense of con-
nectedness with aspects of each other's and one's own cultural experience.
Next, the framework is applied to clinical material with discussion of how
the maps of supervisor, supervisee, and client or family interface and influ-
ence the process. Myths, misconceptions, or stereotypes are discussed as
awareness of some similarity of experience emerges. In the final portion of
the seminar, personal and experiential understandings of prejudice and
stereotyping are processed. In follow-ups, elaborate case analysis is conducted
using Falicov's (1995) model and self-knowledge gleaned during the seminar
about the cultural maps of supervisors and supervisees.
Zimmerman and Haddock (2001) presented a modified "In-the-box/
Out-of-the-box" exercise (which they derived from Creighton and Kivel,
1992). In this activity, boxes are drawn on a board. One box is labeled male,
and the other box is labeled female. Trainees brainstorm traits, attitudes,
characteristics, and behaviors associated with each gender by society. These
factors are "in-the-box" behaviors. Then the trainees describe consequences
of "out-of-the-box" behaviors for men and women. For example, men could
be considered "gay," "weak," or "passive" for exhibiting out-of-the-box be-
haviors, whereas women might be considered to "wear the pants in the
family" as a result of their exhibiting out-of-box behaviors. Trainees also
consider shared, or "common-box," behaviors that could occur, such as
sharing of life tasks.
The appendices of Arredondo et al. (1996) provide excellent activities
to enhance understanding of worldviews. These activities include readings,
workshops and conferences, and strategies.
Simply training supervisees to raise the issue of race and diversity early
in supervision is a preliminary step (Hird et al., 2001). The next step is
to fully incorporate diversity into the supervisory process, which is the
responsibility of the supervisor (Constantine, 1997). Particular processes,
such as addressing the supervisor's or supervisee's feelings at the moment
they occur, using video review to deal with assumptions and feelings elicited
during the session, and determining what prompted particular interventions,
148 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

are all useful in integrating affect, genuineness, and openness into discussions
of diversity (Garrett et al., 2001). It is important to model and describe
examples of what GLB and multiculturally competent therapists say or do
in relevant situations—and what they tend not to say or do (Phillips, 2000).
Awareness of the impact of language and assumptions is another critical
part of supervision teaching. For example, use of words like "partner" rather
than "boyfriend" helps the trainee avoid assumptions of sexual orientation.
Competencies
Cultural competencies required for supervisors include the following:
• Possesses a working knowledge of the factors that affect worldview (e.g.,
optimism and pessimism, the value of tradition, and relationship with nature)
• Possesses self-identity awareness and competence with respect to diversity in
the context of self, supervisee, and client or family
• Exhibits competence in multimodal assessment of the multicultural
competence of trainees, including self-ratings, observational ratings, and
supervisor and client ratings
• Models diversity and multicultural conceptualizations throughout the
supervision process
• Models respect, openness, and curiosity toward all aspects of diversity and its
impact on behavior, interaction, and the therapy and supervision processes
• Initiates discussion of diversity factors in supervision
BUILDING DIVERSITY COMPETENCE 
149

7
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES
AND RISK MANAGEMENT
Even though supervisors are presumably the watchdogs, if not the
bloodhounds, of the psychotherapy process (Slovenko, 1980), the ethics of
supervision has only recently received significant attention. Prior to 1993,
when the Association for Counselor Education and Supervision (ACES)
first published the Ethical Guidelines for Counseling and Supervisors (Asso-
ciation for Counselor Education and Supervision, 1995), the set of ethics
applied to supervision was extrapolated from the APA Ethical Principles
and Code of Conduct (1992). This state of affairs led McCarthy et al. (1988)
to conclude that the contention that "ethical standards exist for supervisors"
is a supervision myth (p. 26). In the latest revision of the APA Ethical
Principles and Code of Conduct, Section 7 is dedicated to education and
training. Nonetheless, the ACES guidelines are the most comprehensive
for supervisors, but have not been adopted by the American Psychological
Association, only by the Association for Counselor Education and Supervi-
sion, a founding division of the American Counseling Association. Absent
specific guidelines from the American Psychological Association, psycholo-
gists would be well advised to follow guidelines established by other, related
professions (J. Younggren, personal communication, 2002).
The role of the supervisor entails being a role model for the trainee
in the conscientious ethical practice of psychology, looking ahead for each
area of practice and its special ethical considerations (e.g., psychodiagnostics;
151

see Rupert, Kozlowski, Hoffman, Daniels, & Piette, 1999), and considering
the ethical issues of the entire administration-supervisor-supervisee-client
chain, with all of its intricacies. Faculty and supervisor role modeling of
ethical behavior is essential, but not sufficient to instilling ethical attitudes
and behavior in students (Kitchener, 1992). As each party in the equation
may (and typically does) wear multiple hats, the complexity grows. As Rest
(1984) cautioned, "students. . .often have a mind set not to look for moral
issues, do not expect that they are an inevitable part of professional life,
and are usually ill-prepared to know how to approach a moral problem when
one does smack them in the face" (p. 21). The message that needs to be
communicated to the supervisees is that "holding ethical standards requires
acting with benevolence and courage rather than donning protective armor
and running for a safe place to hide" (Koocher & Keith-Spiegel, 1998, p. 4).
This chapter provides a review of ethical and legal dilemmas faced
by psychologists, ethical violations that can be made by supervisors and
supervisees, and supervision-related ethical issues. The latter may occur in
areas including competence, due process, informed consent, confidentiality,
multiple or dual relationships, ethical problem-solving approaches, ethics
training, malpractice (including legal precedents in supervisory issues), duty-
to-warn-and-protect issues, documentation, letters of recommendation, and
risk management.
It is incumbent on the supervisor to introduce the supervisee to the
state regulations for the practice of psychology (state licensing board regula-
tions and welfare and institutional codes) as well as ethical and legal codes
regulating practice.
CORE ETHICAL PRINCIPLES
It would be impossible for any ethics code to cover every possible
contingency arising in clinical work or supervision. Thus, it is commendable
that in the latest revision of the APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists
and Code of Conduct (American Psychological Association, 2002a), general
principles are defined. They are beneficence and nonmaleficence; fidelity
and responsibility; integrity, justice, and respect for people's rights; and
dignity. These ethical principles are derived from Beauchamp and Childress
(1979) and others, as described by Kitchener (1984, 2000). Koocher and
Keith-Spiegel (1998) added the following to the list of core ethical principles:
according dignity or viewing others as worthy of respect, treating others with
caring and compassion or being considerate within professional boundaries,
pursuing excellence or maintaining competence and being considerate, and
accepting accountability, which includes considering possible consequences,
accepting responsibility for action or inaction, and acting with integrity.
152 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Meara, Schmidt, and Day (1996) added veracity or truthfulness. These
principles provide a frame for ethical behavior and a structure for supervisory
ethical problem solving.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL DILEMMAS OF PSYCHOLOGISTS
It is useful to look at psychologists' ethical behavior across roles, to
provide a context for their behavior in supervision. In Pope and Vetter's
(1992) study of ethical dilemmas encountered by APA members, the most
frequently cited instances out of 703 troubling ethical incidents were
breaches of confidentiality (18%); blurred, dual, or conflictual relationships
(17%); problems with payment sources, plans, settings, and methods (14%);
and issues concerning academic settings, teaching dilemmas, and training
(8%). Supervision accounted for 2% of the dilemmas. Pope and Vetter
(1992) described difficulties regarding boundaries of confidentiality when
multiple providers or clients were involved.
An analysis of licensing-related disciplinary actions from data collected
by the Association of State and Provincial Psychology Boards revealed a
different profile than APA members' reports of ethical dilemmas (Pope &
Vasquez, 1998). The violations for which disciplinary actions were taken
included sexual or dual relationships with clients (35%); unprofessional,
unethical, or negligent practice (28.6%); fraudulent acts (9.5%); and convic-
tion of crimes (8.6%), with disciplinary action for inadequate or improper
supervision (4.9%) occurring slightly more frequently than for impairment
(4.1%), breach of confidentiality (3.9%), and improper or inadequate record
keeping (3.4%; Pope & Vasquez, 1998, pp. 32-33). Confidentiality issues,
reported as the most frequent ethical dilemma by APA members, had a
low frequency in the disciplinary-actions tally, whereas blurred, dual, or
conflictual relationships, the second most prevalent dilemma in the study
of APA members, corresponded to the high frequency of sexual or dual
relationships in the disciplinary—actions tally. Supervision-related issues,
although at a low frequency in the Pope and Vasquez (1998) study, were
twice as prevalent as in the Pope and Vetter (1992) study. Interestingly,
confidentiality issues were also reported to be the most frequently encoun-
tered dilemmas by college counselors (Hayman & Covert, 1986). It may
be that, although confidentiality dilemmas are very prevalent among prac-
titioners and supervisors, they are resolved informally and thus do not reach
formal levels for resolution.
According to Pope and Vasquez (1998, from data from APA's Insurance
Trust [APAIT]), the top five reasons psychologists were actually sued were
sexual impropriety (20%), incorrect treatment (14%), loss from evaluation
(11%), breach of confidentiality or privacy (7%), and failure to diagnose
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
153

or establishment of an incorrect diagnosis (7%). Failure to supervise properly
(2%) was the 12th most frequent reason in total claims. Although APAIT
cautions in its risk management trainings that conducting supervision,
through the sheer number of cases one oversees, increases one's risk quotient
dramatically (Harris, 2002), this consideration has not been borne out
in practice.
There appears to be a big difference between what the psychologist
knows should be done and what the psychologist actually does (Bersoff,
1995), information that is directly relevant to supervision. An informal
study by Pope and Bajt (1988) determined that over 50% of psychologists
intentionally violated laws or ethical rules. J. L. Bernard & Jara (1995)
presented graduate students in clinical psychology, the majority of whom
had completed an ethics course, with two ethical-violation vignettes. There
was a sizeable disparity between what the students reported they thought
should be done and what they stated they actually would do. When J. L.
Bernard, Murphy, and Little (1987) repeated a modified version of the
study with psychologists who belonged to Division 12 of the American
Psychological Association, they found that a greater proportion of psycholo-
gists reported that they would do what they stated they should do, but 25
to 37% still said that they would do less than what they should do. T. S.
Smith, McGuire, Abbott, and Blau (1991) reported a similar finding.
For psychologists, child-abuse reporting was the area in which they
were most likely to break the law and act on their beliefs (Pope & Vetter,
1992). However, more recently, Renninger, Veach, and Bagdade (2002)
reported adequate knowledge of child-abuse reporting laws and fair satisfac-
tion with them. The stress associated with child-abuse reporting is substan-
tially higher for trainees, especially when making their first or second report.
In addition, the dilemma of child-abuse reporting seems more complex in
relationships where a supervisee is cotherapist and/or has multiple supervi-
sors, because different value systems or thresholds for reporting may exist.
In situations of ethical conflict, clinicians act the way they feel they
should when the situation involves a clear ethical code or law. There are
myriad reasons for discrepancies between clinicians' actual actions and the
actions they feel they should take in other situations. Personal values, belief
structures, and practical considerations seem to temper resolution in less
clear-cut ethical situations (T. S. Smith et al., 1991). The role of emotion
over rationality has been suggested as another explanation of deviation from
ethical principles (Betan & Stanton, 1999), indicating the need for the
integration of emotionality, a factor that is often overlooked, into the
problem-solving and training matrix of ethical decision making. Another
factor that causes deviation from ethical principles is personal life history,
especially history of abuse. Pope and Feldman-Summers (1992) reported
that over two-thirds of female therapists and nearly one-third of male thera-
154 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

pists had experienced abuse in their childhood or adult life. Thus, it is
probable that a similar proportion of supervisees have had such a history.
Greater emotional sensitivity or reactivity to abusive relationships might
then skew reactions of therapists and lead them to deviate from the principles
they would use under other circumstances. The therapist's own trauma
history has been found to affect perceptions of safety, self-trust, and self-
intimacy after dealing with client trauma. This finding was especially true
for therapists with fewer years of experience (Pearlman & Maclan, 1995).
In the area of child clinical psychology, considerations of develop-
mental status played a significant role in beliefs about ethical practice
(Mannheim et al., 2002). Considerations of crossing boundaries (e.g., at-
tending a client's major life event, hugging a client, buying fundraiser items
from a client, giving gifts to a client) and confidentiality (even more im-
perative in protecting adolescents than young children) were subject to
situational influences including the child's age and developmental status,
accounting for possible deviation. In a study by J. R. Sullivan, Ramirez,
Rae, Razo, and George (2002), the respondents, pediatric psychologists,
were most likely to find it ethical to break confidentiality with adolescent
clients to report the following behaviors to parents: suicidal behavior, drug
use, sexual behavior, and alcohol use. Frequency, intensity, duration, and
the actual type of behavior were considerations in the decision. These issues
are particularly difficult for trainees, because of the greater identification
with the child or adolescent that results from closer age proximity.
SUPERVISEE PERCEPTIONS OF SUPERVISORY ETHICS
Ladany, Lehrman-Waterman, Molinaro, and Wolgast (1999) studied
supervisees' perceptions of their supervisor's ethical practices (49% return
rate). Based on the premise that supervisees sometimes believed that their
supervisors had engaged in unethical practices, Ladany et al. surveyed practi-
cum students and interns and found that 51 % of all supervisees reported at
least one ethical violation by their supervisors. The average number of
violations was 1.52, with a standard deviation of 2.35. The most frequent
violations were failure to adhere to ethical guidelines regarding performance
evaluation and general monitoring of student activities, violating areas of
confidentiality with respect to supervision, and working with alternative
theoretical perspectives. The most adhered-to guidelines by supervisors were
those relating to sexual issues, the line between psychotherapy and supervi-
sion, and termination and follow-up issues. Thirty-five percent of supervisees
reported that they discussed violations with their supervisors, 54% discussed
them with someone else, 84% discussed them with a peer or friend in the
field, 33% discussed them with a significant other, 21% discussed them with
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
J 55

another supervisor, and 18% discussed them with a therapist. The supervisees
reported that, 14% of the time, someone in a position of power knew of
the violation, but did nothing about it. Supervisees reported that the viola-
tions had a mild to moderate negative impact on their quality of client
care. Greater frequency of supervisors' unethical behavior was associated
with less satisfaction with the supervisor. Conversely, supervisors who had
lower frequencies of unethical behaviors were associated with more satis-
fied supervisees.
ETHICAL VIOLATIONS BY SUPERVISEES
In an exploratory survey by Fly, van Bark, Weinman, Kitchener, and
Lang (1997) of graduate students in clinical and counseling programs, 89
ethical violations were self-reported by 47 respondents (19% return rate).
As in the Pope and Vetter (1992) study of APA members, confidentiality
was ranked the highest (25%) for types of violations reported. After that
were the categories of professional boundaries, sexual and nonsexual (20%);
plagiarism or falsification of data (15%); compromising of client welfare
(10%); procedural breach with ethical implications (10%); competency
(9%); integrity or dishonesty (8%); and misrepresentation of credentials
(3%). Training directors learned of many of these violations through a third
party (36%) or through either the training director or another faculty
member having witnessed the transgression (25%). Fifty-four percent of the
individuals who committed ethical transgressions had completed an ethics
course. Unfortunately, the return rate in this study was extremely low,
casting significant doubt on the reliability and validity of the findings.
R. L. Worthington, Tan, and Poulin (2002), bemoaning the lack of
attention to ethical requirements and behavior for supervisees, explored
categories of potentially problematic ethical areas for supervisees. Their
questionnaire of ethically questionable practices revealed few discrepancies
between supervisors' and supervisees' perceptions of what behaviors are
unethical. Items that a high percentage of supervisees reported having done
at least once included having negative feelings about the supervisor and
not disclosing them (93%); not completing a timely documentation of client
records (85%); gossiping about a supervisory conflict, but not discussing
with the supervisor (83%); avoiding talking about problems or mistakes in
client work (76%); not discussing negative feelings toward a client (72%);
and not addressing a strong personal (countertransference) reaction (62%).
These findings set the stage for other research that has been done on
supervisee disclosure and negative incidents in supervision, to be discussed
later in the chapter.
156 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

There is ample evidence that current approaches to training in ethics
are not adequate because the transfer of ethical principles and their applica-
tion and use in actual clinical and life situations are not reliable processes.
ETHICAL ISSUES RELATED TO SUPERVISION
General ethical issues identified as pertinent to supervision, extrapo-
lated from Ladany, Lehrman-Waterman, et al.'s (1999) categories, which
were culled from the ACES supervision ethics into a general framework
(in bold print), include competence (Lamb, Cochran, & Jackson, 1991;
Stoltenberg et al., 1998; Vasquez, 1992), due process (J. M. Bernard &
Goodyear, 1998; Russell & Petrie, 1994), informed consent (J. M. Bernard
& Goodyear, 1998; Russell & Petrie, 1994), confidentiality (J. M. Bernard
& Goodyear, 1998; Ladany, Lehrman-Waterman, et al., 1999; Russell &
Petrie, 1994), multiple or dual relationships (J. M. Bernard & Goodyear,
1998; Stoltenberg etal., 1998), and ethical knowledge and behavior and
personal functioning (Lamb et al., 1991; Vasquez, 1992). Evaluation or
performance valuation and monitoring of supervisee activities, also listed
by Ladany, Lehrman-Waterman, et al. (1999) will be discussed in chapter 8,
this volume. Ladany, Lehrman-Waterman, et al. (1999) identified multicul-
tural sensitivity toward clients and supervisees (discussed in chap. 6, this
volume) and client termination and follow-up as issues not addressed in
the ACES ethical guidelines. Each of the foregoing bold categories will be
discussed in this chapter, as well as preventative and problem-solving strate-
gies for dealing with ethical dilemmas and supervisory approaches.
COMPETENCE
Competence entails functioning by the therapist within areas of estab-
lished expertise, training, or experience, and ensuring the same functioning
for the trainee, or providing structure, appropriate referral, or supervision
and consultation. The APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code
of Conduct (American Psychological Association, 2002a, 2.01[a]) includes
the following definition: Boundaries of competence are defined, "Psycholo-
gists provide services, teach, and conduct research with populations and in
areas only within the boundaries of their competence based on their educa-
tion, training, supervised experience, consultation, study, or professional
experience."
Pope and Vasquez (1998) distinguished intellectual competence from
emotional competence. Intellectual competence refers to education and
knowledge of research, interventions, treatment efficacy, and theory, as well
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
157

as critical thinking and conceptualization. A critical part of that area of
competence is awareness of what one does not know. Emotional competence
refers to knowledge of self, monitoring of self, and acceptance of self, areas
relevant to supervisee training in self-care.
In the realm of supervisee competence, Sherry (1991) highlighted a
significant issue in training: The supervisee is in training to learn and is
not yet competent to perform many of the tasks that he or she is assigned.
Simultaneously attending to the best interests of supervisee and client places
the supervisor in a balancing act. The standard that applies to this issue is
as follows, from the APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of
Conduct (American Psychological Association, 2002a):
2.05: Psychologists who delegate work to ... supervisees... take reason-
able steps to ... (2) authorize only those responsibilities that such
persons can be expected to perform competently on the basis of their
education, training, or experience, either independently or with the
level of supervision being provided and (3) see that such persons perform
these services competently.
Assessing One's Own Competence
An issue as central to supervision as it is to clinical practice is defining
and supervising within one's own areas of competence. The assessment of
one's own competence was addressed by Haas and Malouf (1989) with a series
of guidelines that consider the existence of relevant standards, grounding of
the approach in research or theory, contextual constraints, whether one is
emotionally able to be of help, and whether one's decision could be justified
to a group of one's peers. These guidelines are particularly useful in assessing
one's competence to address or supervise problems new to or different from
one's typical area of practice. Self-assessment is a valuable competency for
supervisors to model for supervisees.
Competency in Supervision
Disney and Stephens (1994) asked whether, to be able to supervise,
one must have had specific training in supervision. Considering that compe-
tence is a core ethical value, supervisory competence, derived through educa-
tion, training, and experience, is essential to one's ability to supervise.
However, apart from counseling programs, supervision training is new to
professional training. It is incumbent on the supervisor to obtain the neces-
sary training and to inform supervisees of the training he or she has received
(Kurpius, Gibson, Lewis, & Corbet, 1991). Seventy-two percent of experi-
enced licensed psychologists reported that they were not sure whether their
supervisors had had training to provide supervision (McCarthy et al., 1994).
158 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

An important caution is that supervisors should monitor their own
competence as well as that of their trainees (Russell & Petrie, 1994). A. S.
Newman (1981) described the following components of supervisory compe-
tence: training in the theory and practice of supervision, experience in
practicing the skills they help trainees learn, and training or experience in
assessment or treatment of the types of client problems the trainee is seeing.
If the supervisor is not adequately qualified, supervision by a qualified
clinician should be arranged or the client should be referred out. ACES
Ethical Guidelines for Counseling Supervisors state the following (Associa-
tion for Counselor Education and Supervision, 1995): "3.02: Supervisors
should teach courses and supervise clinical work only in areas where they
are fully competent and experienced." The issue of supervisor competence
was addressed further in chapter 3, this volume.
Supervisor cultural competency also arises in this context. Besides
coursework, the supervisor needs a framework to approach differences in
culture, gender, race, socioeconomic status, religion, and other variables
relevant to the case. The APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code
of Conduct states the following (American Psychological Association,
2002a):
2.01 (b): Where scientific or professional knowledge in the discipline
of psychology establishes that an understanding of factors associated
with age, gender, gender identity, race, ethnicity, culture, national
origin, religion, sexual orientation, disability, language, or socioeco-
nomic status is essential for effective implementation of services or
research, psychologists have to obtain the training, experience, consulta-
tion, or supervision necessary to ensure the competence of their services
or they make appropriate referrals, except as provided in Standard 2.02,
Providing Services in Extraordinary Circumstances.
A controversy in the area of competence has been raised by Pedersen
(2002), who suggested that neither APA's nor ACA's ethical guidelines
are culturally sensitive. He argued that both are culturally encapsulated,
the guidelines for applications are vague, and majority cultural values such
as individualism serve as the norm. From a feminist perspective, Lerman
and Porter (1990) found existing ethical codes reactive rather than proactive,
dichotomizing behavior and ignoring issues of minorities and women.
DUE PROCESS
Ensuring due process, or that the supervisee's rights are not violated
or ignored in supervision, is critical in all aspects of contracting and evalua-
tion of training. It is incumbent on the supervisor to ensure that the super-
visee has a clear understanding of the requirements of the internship or
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
159

placement, specific knowledge of the evaluation tools, and means of assessing
progress. "Supervisors are responsible for informing their supervisees about
their roles, expectations, goals, and criteria for evaluation at the beginning
of supervision" (Cormier Si Bernard, 1982, p. 487). It is also essential to
define what signifies successful completion of the training sequence and the
consequences if these criteria are not satisfied. These tools and processes
lead to definition of problematic students and establish a framework for
dealing with grievances by the trainee or issues of competency discrepancy
raised by the supervisor. Procedures need to be clearly operationalized and
presented to the supervisee. Should there be a due-process case, the trainee
must be given proper notice and opportunity for hearing, defense, and appeal.
INFORMED CONSENT
Informed consent refers to identification of parameters such as the
qualifications and credentials of supervisor and supervisee, methods, logistics,
requirements, responsibilities of the supervisor and supervisee, expectations
for the interaction, evaluation format, and due process (J. M. Bernard &
Goodyear, 1998). It also refers to limits of confidentiality for client, super-
visee, and supervisor; supervision goals; risks and benefits of therapy (J. M.
Bernard & Goodyear, 1998); and costs (Haas & Malouf, 1989). Business
practices are not enforceable without informed consent. Ethical codes em-
phasize informed-consent requirements. For example, the state of Colorado
requires psychologists to present certain written information to their clients,
including therapist credentials, client rights, and the State Grievance Board
address (Handelsman, 1990). Supervisors must be familiar with state
regulations.
The APA Ethics Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct
states the following (American Psychological Association, 2002a):
7.06 (a) In academic and supervisory relationships, psychologists estab-
lish a timely and specific process for providing feedback to students and
supervisees. Information regarding the process is provided to the student
at the beginning of supervision, (b) Psychologists evaluate students and
supervisees on the basis of their actual performance on relevant and
established program requirements.
Item 2.14 of the Ethical Guidelines for Counseling Supervisors by
the Association for Counseling Education and Supervision (1995) specifies
the following:
Supervisors should incorporate the principles of informed consent and
participation; clarity of requirements, expectations, roles and rules, and
due process and appeal into the establishment of policies and procedures
160 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

of their institution, program, courses, and individual supervisory rela-
tionships. Mechanisms for due process appeal of individual supervisor
actions should be established and made available to all supervisees.
There are multiple levels of informed consent in supervision and various
pieces of descriptive information within each level. Falvey (2002) described
five levels of informed consent. First, the client consents to treatment by
the supervisee and that the supervisor will supervise the case. Second,
the supervisor and supervisee consent to the supervisory responsibility and
relationship. Third, the institution consents to comply with the clinical,
ethical, and legal dimensions of supervision. Failure to obtain informed
consent of the client has been ruled to be a form of malpractice (Falvey,
2002). Fourth, the client must be informed that his or her therapist is a
trainee under the supervision of a named individual, the provision of whose
license and contact information may be required. Fifth, the client must
consent that confidential information and the therapy process will be shared
with the supervisor. Failure to obtain this consent could "subject both the
supervisor and the supervisee to a claim of negligent breach of confidential-
ity" (Disney & Stephens, 1994, p. 24).
McCarthy et al. (1995) outlined specific contents of each informed-
consent category with respect to the supervisory relationship. In the profes-
sional disclosure statement spelled out by McCarthy et al. (1995), the super-
visor should disclose multiple aspects regarding supervision. McCarthy et al.
advocated disclosure of the supervisor's background information, including
licensure, academic, clinical, and supervision training information; a list of
the supervisor's professional associations; and the supervisor's theoretical
orientation(s) for therapy and for supervision. Several of these factors should
be listed in the contract (see chap. 8, this volume), namely, items concerning
the logistics pertaining to supervision, including frequency and duration,
location, and what occurs if either the supervisee or the supervisor cancels
a session, and details of the learning contract for successful completion.
Also contained in the contract are objectives of the supervision process,
expectations of the contributions of each objective, advance preparation and
presentation materials, and requirements for audio or videotaping. Finally,
McCarthy et al. (1995) spelled out evaluation and due-process considera-
tions to ensure knowledge of the type, expectations, criteria, specific format,
and frequency of administration. Trainees have the right to know the perfor-
mance competencies for satisfactory employment or completion of training
(Disney 6k Stephens, 1994). Preferably, this information should be in written
format and signed by supervisee and supervisor. The requirement of adher-
ence to legal and ethical standards, often assumed, is clearly stated and
agreed to as well. Finally, due-process procedures should be covered, either
in this document or in a site handbook.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
I61

Inconsistency in informing supervisees of limits of confidentiality has
been reported (McCarthy et at, 1994). The parameters of confidentiality
should be articulated so that it is clear what information a supervisor may
share, for example, among a training staff, with administrative supervisors,
or with graduate faculty. McCarthy et al. (1994) found that one-fifth of
the licensed clinicians receiving supervision were unsure whether their
supervisors maintained confidentiality. Supervisees need to be informed
about the limits of confidentiality: that information gleaned in supervisory
encounters will be used for evaluation of their clinical skills, evaluation of
the supervisee's competency to be an effective therapist (Patrick, 1989),
and in supervisory team program planning.
In a study of informed consent, content areas covered for client service
varied dramatically across psychologists (Handelsman, Kemper, Kesson-
Craig, McLain, & Johnsrud, 1986), with differing content regarding confi-
dentiality and risks of therapy (Talbert & Pipes, 1988) and inconsistency
in informing clients of confidentiality parameters in child-abuse reporting
(Nicolai & Scott, 1994). Nicolai and Scott (1994) found that 20% of
the psychologists surveyed indicated that they sometimes, rarely, or never
provided information to clients about confidentiality, and over 5% told
clients that everything is confidential.
The situation is more complex with clients who are minors. In such
cases, the supervisor-supervisee dyad must tailor the developmentally appro-
priate level of involvement in consent procedures (Gustafson & McNamara,
1999), communicate meaningfully with comprehensible language (L. Taylor
&. Adelman, 1995), and achieve great clarity in articulation of limits of
confidentiality and what will be disclosed to parents. It is important to
present the entire informed consent in understandable terms to the child
or adolescent. Gray areas often pertain to substance use and sexuality.
Gustafson and McNamara (1999) suggested a process for establishing the
necessary and appropriate degree of confidentiality, including pretreatment
family meetings with the parent and the adolescent and explanations of
rationale for confidentiality decisions followed by a written professional-
services agreement signed by all. Extra steps in this process would be added
after thorough exploration and decision making between the supervisee and
supervisor, prior to and during the process with the family. In some cases,
the negotiation may be difficult, as the age of the supervisee may be close
to that of the adolescent, resulting in the supervisee's identification with
the adolescent, with the supervisor in the position of "parent."
Also at issue is the capacity of the client to competently assess treat-
ment. Not only must clients be informed, but also they must be competent
to make a decision about participation in treatment. Trainees must have
developmental and cognitive assessment skills integral to such a decision.
162 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

CONFIDENTIALITY
Confidentiality is a general standard of professional conduct that may
be based in statutes, case law, or ethics and has some legal recognition
(Koocher & Keith-Spiegel, 1998). Privilege is the legal term that describes
specific relationships that are protected from disclosure in legal proceedings.
Injaffee v. Redmond, the U.S. Supreme Court ruled in 1996 that communica-
tions which occur between a psychotherapist and patient are privileged in
the federal courts (Mosher & Squire, 2002). All ethical and legal considera-
tions must be applied to the rights of the client to confidentiality and to the
maintenance of client information in the context of supervisor-supervisee or
supervisor-supervisor communications. On-line supervision (Kanz, 2001)
presents unique challenges in the area of confidentiality (and informed
consent) because of the loss of objective control over transmitted data.
With the adoption of the privacy rule of the Health Insurance Portability
and Accountability Act (HIPAA), any health-care provider who transmits
protected health information in electronic form or who acts on behalf of
such an individual is required to be HIPAA compliant (www.apait.org/
resources/hipaa). In HIPAA situations, great specificity is added to the form
of consent and proximity in the timing of consent in relation to the release
of information. The implications of HIPAA for training settings are just
beginning to be explored.
Confidentially is governed by "the law of no surprises" and "the parsi-
mony principle" (Behnke, Preis, & Bates, 1998). These terms refer to address-
ing the limits of confidentiality in a way that is relevant to the particular
client and eliminates surprise disclosures. When it is necessary to disclose,
only information that is necessary and sufficient to address the need is
disclosed. It is essential to communicate this concept to supervisees.
Confidentiality in the context of supervision refers to the entire realm
of client confidentiality, with added dimensions. Koocher and Keith-Spiegel
(1998) stated, "In general, students (including psychology interns, unli-
censed post-doctoral fellows or supervisees) are not specifically covered by
privilege statutes. In some circumstances, trainees may be covered by privi-
lege accorded to communication with a licensed supervisor, but state laws
vary widely, and this cannot be assumed" (p. 118). The supervisor must be
aware of the status of supervisees under his or her state law. A preferred
modality of training is to observe videos of therapy sessions or to have teams
observe live treatment. Protection of the client or family is paramount and
may be difficult to achieve when supervision is involved. In the area of
confidentiality within trainee behavior and records, informed consent is
needed to articulate the entire range of review and information sharing that
may occur as a matter of course within the operation of the training program.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
163

This range may include client data as well as trainee data, and the parameters
of disclosure need to be articulated to all parties involved.
The potential for "domestic violations of confidentiality" (Woody,
1999), or accidental disclosures made to significant others or in day-to-day
life, needs to be discussed with supervisees. It is also important to introduce
trainees to issues regarding accidental encounters with clients (Pulakos,
1994; Sharkin & Birky, 1992). A thoughtful approach to each area demon-
strates in vivo for the trainee the application of ethical principles to day-
to-day practice.
MULTIPLE AND DUAL RELATIONSHIPS
The term "multiple relationships" refers to instances when the therapist
is in another, significantly different (perhaps social, financial, or professional)
relationship with one of his or her clients (Pope, 1999). A multiple relation-
ship exists when a therapist or supervisor has a concurrent or consecutive
personal, social, business or professional relationship (Sonne, 1999) with a
client or supervisee in addition to the therapist-client or supervisor-
supervisee relationship, and these roles conflict or compete (Kitchener,
1988). Types of nonsexual and nonromantic relationships that might occur
after therapy (or supervision) is terminated are personal-friendship, social,
business, financial, collegial, professional, supervisory, evaluative, religious,
social, and workplace relationships (Anderson & Kitchener, 1996). Our
discussion focuses on the general ethical issues for the therapist and their
translation to the supervisory relationship.
The Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct states
the following (American Psychological Association, 2002a)
3.05 (a) A psychologist refrains from entering into a multiple relation-
ship if the multiple relationship could reasonably be expected to impair
the psychologist's objectivity, competence, or effectiveness in perform-
ing his or her functions as a psychologist, or otherwise risk exploitation
or harm to the person with whom the professional relationship exists.. . .
Multiple relationships that would not reasonably be expected to cause
impairment or risk exploitation or harm are not unethical.
The ACES Ethical Guidelines for Counseling Supervisors (Association
for Counselor Education and Supervision, 1995) state the following:
2.09 Supervisors who have multiple roles (e.g., teacher, clinical supervi-
sor, administrative supervisor, etc.) with supervisees should minimize
potential conflicts. Where possible, the roles should be divided among
several supervisors. Where this is not possible, careful explanation
should be conveyed to the supervisee as to the expectations and responsi-
bilities associated with each supervisory role.
164 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Section 2.05 of the APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code
of Conduct states, "Psychologists who delegate work to ... supervisees . . .
take reasonable steps to ... avoid delegating such work to persons who have
a multiple relationship with those being served that would likely lead to
exploitation or loss of objectivity" (American Psychological Association,
2002a). Section 3.05c of the APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and
Code of Conduct states the following (American Psychological Associa-
tion, 2002a):
When psychologists are required by law, institutional policy, or extra-
ordinary circumstances to serve in more than one role in judicial or
administrative proceedings, at the outset they clarify role expectations
and the extent of confidentiality and thereafter as changes occur.
Finally, Section 7.07 of the APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists
and Code of Conduct states, "Psychologists do not engage in sexual relation-
ships with students or supervisees who are in their department, agency, or
training center or over whom psychologists have or are likely to have
evaluative authority" (American Psychological Association, 2002a). Note
that this section is a significant expansion on the guidelines for sexual
relationships from the previous code. It includes the broader center or agency
in internships and postdoctoral training sites rather than only individuals
with evaluative function.
Sonne (1999) described dynamics of relationship-related and individ-
ual role-related expectations and responsibilities, emotional involvement
with the therapist and the therapeutic process, and the power differential,
all of which are affected by a multiple relationship. Such multiple or dual
relationships may be tolerated and justified through selective inattention
to evidence, lack of mention in therapy notes, citation of the relationship's
benefits to the client, citation of prevalence data on dual relationships (e.g.,
"Everyone does it"), or belief that there was no alternative (Pope, 1999).
Application of these codes to small communities or rural settings may be
more complicated. Schank and Skovholt (1997) and Campbell and Gordon
(2003) provided safeguards for minimizing risk in these contexts, including
clarification of expectations and boundaries when out-of-therapy contact
cannot be controlled.
This area is far from simple and thus deserves significant attention in
supervision. The controversy associated with multiple relationships and
their appropriate quality and even necessity for conducting therapy with
individuals one knows in another context have been both espoused and
argued against (Lazarus & Zur, 2002), and the latter approach is reflected
in the 2002 revision of the APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and
Code of Conduct statement, in the last line of Section 3.05 (a): "Multiple
relationships that would not reasonably be expected to cause impairment
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
165

or risk exploitation or harm are not unethical" (American Psychological
Association, 2002a). Lazarus and Zur (2002) explicitly supported Ebert's
(2002) decision tree regarding "prohibited-class" relationships. They argued
that, in a multitude of communities, including rural, religious, gay, feminist,
and ethnic minorities, there are unavoidable multiple relationships. In addi-
tion, they cited numerous examples of planned clinical interventions (e.g.,
lunch with an eating-disordered client) that constitute boundary crossings
in the eyes of some. Ethics committees and risk managers, they argued, are
guided more by fear of attorneys and licensing boards than by clinically
indicated considerations.
Another controversial example is the feminist-therapy position that
self-disclosure is a way to build egalitarian relationships and is central to
the therapy process. However, feminist therapists caution against careless
use of self-disclosure or its use more for the benefit of the therapist than
the client (Enns, 1993). In multicultural-counseling training, it is urged
that the therapist also promote the use of self-help, outreach workers, om-
budsmen, and facilitators of indigenous support systems (Atkinson, Morten,
et al., 1993). These examples illustrate how alternative models challenge
traditional ones.
Boundary Behaviors
The establishment and maintenance of boundary behaviors that mark
limits of appropriate and ethical practice, including structural (e.g., roles,
time, and place—space) and process (e.g., gifts, language, self-disclosure,
physical contact, and interactional patterns) dimensions, is a central ethical
dilemma of psychologists (Gutheil & Gabbard, 1993; Lamb & Catanzaro,
1998; D. Smith & Fitzpatrick, 1995). First we shall define some terms
related to the concept of boundary behaviors. Then we will discuss modeling
considerations and then their applications to supervision. A boundary is
"defined as the 'edge' of appropriate or professional behavior, transgression
of which involves the therapist stepping out of the clinical role" (Gutheil
& Simon, 2002, p. 585). "Slippery slopes" refer to seemingly insignificant
erosions in boundaries that transform into significant violations. Lamb and
Catanzaro (1998) reviewed evidence that erosion of benign boundary cross-
ings may be either a precipitant (Folman, 1991) or a predictor of a sexual
relationship that ensues.
A boundary crossing is a "nonpejorative term that describes departures
from commonly accepted clinical practice that may or may not benefit the
client" (D. Smith & Fitzpatrick, 1995, p. 500). Boundary crossings may be
harmless, nonexploitative, and supportive of the therapy (Gutheil & Simon,
2002). Thus, they are to be distinguished from boundary violations, which
are defined as departures from accepted practice that place the client, super-
166 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

visee, or the therapeutic process at serious risk (Gutheil & Gabbard, 1993)
because they constitute exploitation of the client (Gutheil & Simon, 2002).
It is important to consider boundary crossings as potentially high-risk behav-
iors and to remember that, ultimately, the supervisor is responsible for
establishing and maintaining boundaries of professionalism (Gutheil &
Simon, 2002). Gutheil and Gabbard (1993) divided boundary crossings and
violations into categories of role, time, place and space, money, gifts, services
and related matters, clothing, language, self-disclosure and related matters,
and physical contact. A training activity is to list boundary crossings in the
training setting and discuss them.
Dual Relationships During the Internship Year
Dual relationships may occur between supervisee and supervisor, be-
tween supervisee and client, or between supervisor and client. Dual relation-
ships during the internship year include relationships related to business,
social, therapy, and sexual factors (Slimp & Burian, 1994). Examples of
business relationships are staff members hiring interns as employees to baby-
sit, assist as research assistants, or conduct private practice. In such cases,
issues arise of power differential, exploitation, transference, and placement
of interns in a situation that is difficult, if not impossible, for them to refuse.
The supervisor-employer may find objective evaluation clouded by the dual
relationship or the possibility that the employment went awry, resulting in
injury or other untoward outcomes. For sexual relationships, what was seen
as love during the relationship is viewed as a mishandling of the transference
after the end of the relationship (Caudill, 2002). Social relationships, a
normative step on the road to the supervisor's and supervisee's becoming
colleagues, can be problematic for the same reasons as business dual roles
and should be viewed as a boundary crossing.
Prevalence of Sexual Misconduct
Sexual relationships between trainees and educators or supervisors
have been extensively explored and are generally prohibited. Glaser and
Thorpe (1986) reported that 17% of their respondents, female members of
APA Division 12, Clinical Psychology, indicated that they had had sexual
contact with psychology educators as graduate students. Thirty-one percent
of the respondents reported having experienced sexual advances by teachers
or supervisors during their training or psychotherapy. Nearly half of W. L.
Robinson and Reid's (1985) sample experienced seductive behavior with
educators while they were graduate students. However, Hammel, Olkin,
and Taube (1996) reported substantially less student—educator sex, 10%.
Lamb, Catanzaro, and Moorman (2003) reported a 10% incidence of sex
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
167

during professionals' own training or psychotherapy and 3% during their
professional careers. The probability of sexual seduction was greater for
clinical-psychology students than for students in other areas of psychology
(Glaser & Thorpe, 1986) and greater for female students than male students
(Hammel et al., 1996). Sexual seduction was reportedly initiated prior to
or during a working relationship (Hammel et al., 1996) or after the working
relationship (Lamb et al., 2003).
The percentage of clinical supervisors who have had sexual relation-
ships with their supervisees is estimated to range from 1.4% (W. L. Robinson
& Reid, 1985) or 1.5% (Lamb & Catanzaro, 1998) to 4% (Pope, Levenson,
& Schover, 1979), whereas the percentage of supervisees who have been
sexually involved with their supervisors is reported to be 5-6% (Glaser &
Thorpe, 1986; G. M. Miller & Larrabee, 1995) or as low as 1% (Lamb et al.,
2003). Note that the frequency of therapist-client sex has declined to a
4 to 6% level (Lamb & Catanzaro, 1998; Rodolfa, Kitzrow, Vohra, & Wilson,
1990) or lower (Lamb et al., 2003; Pope & Vasquez, 1999) from the 12%
figures reported for male therapists in the 1970s (Holroyd & Brodsky, 1977;
Pope et al., 1979). However, some suspect that the rate is actually higher,
but incidence of reporting is lower, because of compelling reasons for with-
holding such information (Samuel & Gorton, 1998; D. Smith & Fitzpatrick,
1995). Women were significantly more likely to have experienced a sexual-
boundary violation as a client, supervisee, or student than were men (Lamb
& Catanzaro, 1998). Rates of trainee-client sexual offense have been re-
ported to be very low (Layman & McNamara, 1997). Fifty-three percent
of female psychologists reported having experienced sexual harassment by
a patient at some time during their career (deMayo, 1997), and 47% of
clinical supervisors reported one or more incidents of a supervisee reporting
sexual harassment by a client (deMayo, 2000).
Feelings of Sexual Attraction
Between 80 and 88% of psychologists report having been attracted to
or having had sexual feelings for at least one client (Blanchard & Lichten-
berg, 1998; Pope, Keith-Spiegel, & Tabachnick, 1986; Rodolfa et al., 1994).
Slightly more than half of the student sample reported sexual attraction
(Housman & Stake, 1999). Sixty-eight percent of clinical doctoral students
surveyed did not know that it is acceptable and normative to have sexual
feelings for clients. Thirty-four percent of clinical doctoral students did not
understand that it is not acceptable to have sex with a client after termination
or transfer; 7% did not know that sex with current clients is always prohibited
(Housman & Stake, 1999). Of those supervisees who actually reported sexual
feelings toward clients, 34 to 45% said that they did not discuss these feelings
in supervision (Blackshaw & Patterson, 1992; Housman & Stake, 1999).
168 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

In a study of psychology interns (29% return rate), only about half of a
small sample disclosed their feelings of sexual attraction toward clients to
their supervisor, although they did typically discuss these issues with peers
and therapists. They reported both beneficial and negative effects of the
discussion of attraction on the supervision and on therapy with the clients
(Ladany, O'Brien et al., 1997). Sixty-three percent of psychologists reported
feeling guilty, anxious, or confused about their feelings of sexual attraction
toward clients (Pope et al., 1986).
Housman & Stake (1999) were concerned that their results indicated
that, although training in sexual ethics has increased, students have not
gained greater understanding. In fact, attention to a wide range of sexual
topics was "neutral," defined as neither excellent nor poor, in graduate
training (M. P. Ford & Hendrick, 2003). Graduate student respondents felt
that clinical'training programs do little to prepare them for sexual attraction
to their clients and do not teach them ways of handling such attractions.
Only 9% of psychologists believed that their training or supervision had
been adequate to help them deal with this issue (Pope et al., 1986). Four
percent overall (Rodolfa et al., 1994), or 9% of men and 2.5% of women
(Pope et al., 1986), reported that they had acted on their feelings of sex-
ual attraction.
Inadequate training in handling sexual feelings and in the ethics of
sexual involvement with educators has been reported (Glaser & Thorpe,
1986; Pope & Tabachnick, 1993). Clinicians have reported that, when
confronted with such feelings, they would introspect about the feelings
(75.4%), consult with a colleague (50.7%), seek out supervision (36.4%),
consult available literature (22.7%), do nothing (11.8%), refer the client
to another professional (7.8%), begin or resume personal therapy (7%), tell
the client about the sexual feelings (5.9%), or pursue a sexual relationship
with the client (1.1%; Blanchard & Lichtenberg, 1998). Although consulta-
tion or supervision accounted for substantial numbers of the responses (and
some respondents picked multiple choices), it is still worrisome that a
substantial portion simply would introspect, do nothing, or pursue the sexual
relationship by discussion or action with the client.
Supervisors need to be competent in their training in sexual-attraction
and boundary issues, assertive in bringing these issues up in supervision,
and aware of their own feelings that may deter such supervision or increase
the probability of a parallel process (of sexual attraction) in supervision. In
a study by Holmes, Rupert, Ross, and Shapera (1999), college undergraduates
rated hypothetical relationships between a male faculty member and a
student. The least appropriate potential dual relationships were the faculty
member flirting with the student, telling the student he is attracted to him
or her, getting drunk with the student, telling sexually explicit jokes during
an office meeting with the student, and getting high with the student. It
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
169

is encouraging that undergraduates identify such behaviors as inappropriate,
but the power differential may mediate responsiveness of graduate students
to such behavior. Training in identification of danger signals, use of role-
play, and implementation of a nonjudgmental approach by supervisors to
disclosures need to occur.
Sexual harassment of supervisees by clients must also be addressed, as
must the place of sexual feelings in psychotherapy, so that supervisees may
be prepared for such encounters (deMayo, 1997). The book by Pope, Sonne,
and Holroyd (1993) Sexual Feelings in Psychotherapy, is an excellent train-
ing tool.
Supervisory discomfort with sexual issues and with sexual feelings
between trainees and clients leads to dismissal of the topic or subtle commu-
nication that these issues are not to be discussed. Feelings of sexual attraction
are more stressful for practicum and intern trainees than for professional
staff (Rodolfa, Kraft, & Reilley, 1988) and thus are another factor that
increases the risk of trainees' being overwhelmed.
Ninety-nine percent of training programs in psychiatry and psychology
surveyed by Samuel and Gorton (1998) addressed the issue of therapist-
client sexual misconduct. However, most offered only minimal training—
perhaps a one-hour lecture (Samuel & Gorton, 1998). Training on this
issue should come early in the graduate sequence (Housman & Stake, 1999),
should spell out the differences between sexual misconduct and the natural
phenomenon of sexual attraction, and should be thorough and integral to
all training (Conroe & Schank, 1989).
Predictors of sexual-boundary risk were explored in a retrospective
analysis of characteristics that sexually offending trainees had in common
(Hamilton & Spruill, 1999). These characteristics included loneliness, prior
quasi "counseling" experience, professional inexperience, training factors
such as instruction on dealing with sexual feelings of attraction, failure to
recognize ethical conflicts, and failure of supervisors to supervise in these
areas. Brodsky (1989) described similar risk factors that increase therapist
and client risk for sexual involvement: proneness to boundary crossings,
situational vulnerability (perhaps because of a personal stressor), and isola-
tion. A similar finding was reported for practicing psychologists: Boundary
violations were associated with personal problems such as depression or
divorce (Lamb et al., 2003).
Prevention of Client-Therapist Sexual Misconduct
One strategy to prevent sexual-boundary violations, presented by Ham-
ilton and Spruill (1999), is education about the risks of such behavior.
Under this approach, before trainees see clients, they are provided with
education (and self-disclosure) by faculty and supervisors on sexual attract-
170 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

ion, how to deal with it, and the necessity of seeking supervision. Specifically,
trainees should learn warning signs and risk factors for therapist-client
intimacy and the harmful effects that can occur as a result of it. Social-
skills training and role-playing can be used to model and decrease anxiety
related to dealing with sexual attraction and misconduct. Departmental
policies on ethical infractions should be made clear, with differentiation
between normally occurring feelings and actions that are unacceptable. Clear
case conceptualization should be standard practice so that the supervisor can
evaluate deviation in the therapeutic relationship. The Hamilton and Spruill
(1999) approach is exceptionally useful (see Appendix F), as is working
knowledge of the risk factors it describes.
Some traditional protective factors may have been decreased because
of increased productivity requirements, the concomitant decrease in allotted
supervision time, and movement away from psychodynamic theory, with its
emphasis on countertransference reactions. However, Hamilton and Spruill
(1999) concluded that boundary violations are more easily identified by
cognitive behavioral therapists who use concretely operationalized assess-
ment and treatment.
Intern-Supervisor Sexual Relationships
Because of the power differential and the supervisee vulnerability im-
plicit in supervisee—supervisor sexual relationships, completely voluntary
consent is impossible in trainee—supervisor sexual relationships (Koocher
& Keith-Spiegel, 1998). Thus, to argue that such a relationship is consensual
may be fallacious.
Consequences of a sexual relationship between supervisor and super-
visee can be serious and pervasive. Such a relationship may arise out of
"romantic or passionate love" (Pope, Schover, & Levenson, 1980, p. 159)
or as a trade for academic advancement as a type of prostitution (Pope
et al., 1980). Regardless of who initiates the sexual behavior, Conroe and
Schank (1989) urged supervisory responsibility in dealing with this behavior
systematically and conscientiously. Once the behavior occurs unchecked,
interns may not feel able to confront or disagree with the supervisor or to
discuss case material relating to sexuality or his or her personal responses
to clinical material. The staff member's ability to evaluate the supervisee
is also severely compromised (Conroe & Shank, 1989; Slimp & Burian,
1994). There is the subsequent danger that what started as a consensual
sexual liaison evolves into what feels like coercion, a probability that in-
creases with time (Glaser & Thorpe, 1986; Slimp & Burian, 1994) as
recollections of events in the liaison grow harsher, seeming more coercive
and harmful than they did when they occurred (Glaser & Thorpe, 1986;
G. M. Miller & Larrabee, 1995). According to interviews that took place
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
171

some time after the event, individuals involved in sexual liaisons while in
training grew to perceive those relationships as ethically problematic and
as hindering to their working relationships (Hammel et al., 1996). It is
interesting that 40% of Lamb et al.'s (2003) sample of 13 individuals who
had engaged in a sexual-boundary violation believed that no harm had been
done, and a lesser number (28%) proceeded with the sexual relationship
even though they understood that they were engaging in unethical or
problematic behavior. The discrepancy between perceptions of the powerful
member of the dyad and of the less powerful one is an important area for
further research.
Legal jeopardy resulting from sexual-boundary violations increases be-
cause of inadequate supervision or the accusation of unfairness of evaluation
after the sexual relationship ends (Slimp & Burian, 1994). The impact of
an intern's sexual relationship with a staff member can be far reaching on
the intern group, the staff, the agency, and the profession in general (Slimp
& Burian, 1994). Isolation from the intern group, hostility over perceived
preferential treatment or evaluation rivalry, fractionalization of staff mem-
bers regarding the relationship, ostracism, or questioning of the professional
judgment of the staff member are all possible results. In addition, engaging
in sexual relations with a staff member is poor modeling and casts doubts
on how the entire profession is viewed (Slimp & Burian, 1994). Because
the professional community may be slow to acknowledge the potential
damage of sexual contact between supervisor and supervisee, the supervisee
may be stigmatized and the entire situation may ultimately go unacknowl-
edged (Conroe & Schank, 1989). In a study conducted by W. L. Robinson
and Reid (1985), 96% of the females who responded that they had experi-
enced sexual contact or harassment as students felt that their relationship
was harmful to one or both parties.
Although researchers had previously suggested that students or trainees
sexually involved with their own therapists, supervisors, or educators would
later have a greater probability of becoming offenders themselves (Bartell
& Rubin, 1990; Pope et al., 1979), Lamb and Catanzaro's (1998) data did
not fully support that prediction.
Risk Factors and Boundary Issues
Self-disclosure (Koocher & Keith-Spiegel, 1998) and touch are de-
scribed as precursors of slippery slopes (Lamb, 2001). But whether self-
disclosure is a facilitating factor in therapeutic and supervisory interactions
or a risk factor is not clear. Lamb (2001) outlined levels of personal self-
disclosure. First is the disclosure of public information that is easily accessible
to clients. Second is the disclosure of private information not known to
clients, such as the number of children one has. Third is the disclosure of
172 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

private events experienced by the therapist, including divorce, loss, or
trauma. Fourth is the disclosure of personal opinions, beliefs, or feelings
related to the client or to the client's concerns, such as views on abortion
and assisted suicide. This category includes the therapist's personal reactions
to the client. Areas generally agreed on as not suitable for disclosure include
details of current life stressors, dreams, fantasies, or social, sexual, or financial
circumstances (Gutheil & Gabbard, 1993). A defining factor may be whether
the disclosure is being made for the purposes of the therapist or in the
context of treatment in consideration of the client's mental state (Caudill,
2002). It is critical that supervisees be given a framework for such disclosures
over time so that they may explore the purpose of particular disclosures
they make to clients.
In his or her multiple roles as supervisor, administrator, and evaluator,
the supervisor may encounter further boundary issues. For example, the
supervisee may be expected to self-disclose and be forthcoming. There may
be seminars or groups in which discussion of one's personal cultural, ethnic,
racial, sexual, or other background is expected. This situation may be difficult
for supervisees who fear that disclosures may be included in evaluation and
for supervisors when disclosures coupled with certain actions taken by the
supervisee are indicative of problematic behavior.
Note 7.04 of the APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code
of Conduct has the following to say on this topic (American Psychological
Association, 2002a):
Psychologists do not require students or supervisees to disclose personal
information in course- or program-related activities, either orally or in
writing, regarding sexual history, history of abuse and neglect, psycholog-
ical treatment, and relationships with parents, peers, and spouses or
significant others except if (1) the program or training facility has clearly
identified this requirement in its admissions and program materials or
(2) the information is necessary to evaluate or obtain assistance for
students whose personal problems could reasonable be judged to be
preventing them from performing their training- or professionally related
activities in a competent manner or posing a threat to the students
or others.
Illfelder-Kaye (2002) suggested that it is essential that training pro-
grams which place particular value on personal exploration in supervision
state this principle clearly in their program descriptions and brochures.
Patrick (1989) stated, "A unique ethical dilemma arises when, as a
direct result of this dual relationship in the training laboratory, the supervisor
becomes aware of personality traits in the client that the supervisor believes
will interfere with that student's ability to function as a counselor. According
to the ethical standards, the supervisor also has an ethical responsibility as
a member of the counselor education faculty to screen and monitor graduate
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
173

students in the counselor-training program" (p. 339). This situation is a
dilemma for the empathic supervisor who encourages self-disclosure and
who is also the evaluator and the liaison to the trainee's academic institution.
An example of such circumstances is when the intense emotional tone or
disclosure of a client triggers memories of traumatic events in the trainee's
life experience. Alternatively, disclosures may cast doubt on the appropriate-
ness of the trainee to function as a psychologist. The training contract
should articulate procedures regarding confidentiality and disclosure.
Sherry (1991) emphasized the complexity of supervisors' simultaneous
multiple roles. Kitchener (1986) further articulated the ways in which super-
visees' and supervisors' roles may be problematical. For example, if a particu-
lar supervisee is also a supervisor to a younger trainee, there is a shift from
the prior collegiality between the supervisee and his or her trainee to a
relationship involving authority, which may cause role confusion or conflict.
The danger of a boundary violation or assumption of multiple roles is very
great. Kitchener (1986) pointed out that objectivity, confidentiality, the
therapeutic process, and autonomy are at risk in such cases. It is useful to
consider the Role Conflict and Role Ambiguity Inventory (see Appendix H)
to assess role difficulties that may result in anxiety and dissatisfaction (Oik
& Friedlander, 1992).
Another ethical issue in supervision is the establishment of appropriate
boundaries between supervision and therapy. Section 7.05 (b) of the APA
Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct states the following
(American Psychological Association, 2002a): "Faculty who are or are likely
to be responsible for evaluating students' academic performance do not
themselves provide that therapy." The therapylike aspects of supervision
that deal with countertransference may segue to actual therapy provided by
supervisors apart from or within supervision. Boundaries need to be clearly
defined, with a focus on the aspects that relate directly to the impact on
the client or case. Supervisees' problems in the supervisory and therapeutic
situations are addressed, but only to the extent that they affect the relation-
ship with the supervisor or relationships with clients (Doehrman, 1976).
A specific strategy for approaching issues that may cross the line from
supervision to therapy was proposed by Whiston and Emerson (1989) in
building on a model by Egan (1986). A problematic situation, identified in
supervision, is addressed, explored, and clarified. The supervisor determines
whether personal problems are the reason the trainee is having difficulty
with a particular case or whether the trainee's issue is being exacerbated in
supervision. Depending on the result of the exploration, the emotional
response of the trainee, countertransference phenomena, or other determina-
tions, appropriate steps are taken, including a possible referral for therapy
for the trainee and a decision about the future of the therapeutic relationship.
It is important to delineate the trainee's rights of due process before recom-
174 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

mending counseling services and to clearly differentiate supervision from
a counseling relationship. Whiston and Emerson (1989) focused on the
importance of remaining centered on the professional development of the
trainee rather than proceeding to develop action-oriented understandings
of the personal problems. In this way, the supervisor provides definition and
avoids playing the dual role of counselor.
Prevention of Boundary Violations
There are three general categories of interventions and strategies for
preventing boundary violations and other ethical breaches. First are psycho-
educational approaches that enhance awareness and introduce environmental
modifications to promote safety. Second are strategies to provide frameworks
for decision making to prevent harmful multiple relationships. Third are
more general decision-making models to approach ethical dilemmas.
Psychoeducational Approaches
Lamb (1999) described several strategies that include emotional tone
or climate dimensions to prevent trainees from making boundary violations
and the resulting burnout. First, orientation efforts could enhance bonding,
provide support for stress, and allow for a safe place to discuss boundary
dilemmas. There should be clearly articulated channels to discuss, report,
and deal with inappropriate behavior by faculty, staff, or peers without fear
of reprisal. Seminars on self-care, stress reduction, and identification of and
dealing with boundary crossings and violation are desirable. Role-playing
or in vivo techniques are strongly recommended as well (Lamb, 1999).
The concept of preventative self-care training and especially the notion of
education on monitoring factors that might contribute to ethical violations
to prevent them are at the forefront of proactive feminist approaches to
ethics (Porter, 1995).
Rodolfa et al. (1990) proposed a means of approaching the differentia-
tion of normative sexual feelings and sexual acting out in their description
of several training experiences, including a brief seminar and a one-day
conference with opportunities for small-group discussion of critical issues
in attraction and responding to innuendo. A critical concept in these training
experiences was how to distinguish between sexual attraction (a normative
response) and sexual acting out. It is very important for training directors
to incorporate these areas into the training sequence from the onset.
Biaggo, Paget, and Chenoweth (1997) proposed a preventive model
for faculty-student dual relationships. Because of enhanced risk from over-
lapping social, mentoring, and professional relationships that are normative,
these authors described the training department as potentially a very small,
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
175

closed community. They suggested particular guidelines for relationships to
acknowledge the power and responsibility of faculty, develop an evaluative
frame for faculty—student relationships to avoid exploitation, and foster a
climate that supports ethical relationships with students, faculty role model-
ing of appropriate ethical behavior, and safety in discussion of perceived
boundary issues.
Ethical Problem Solving and Decision Making in Dual Relationships: Strategies
to Prevent Harm
Kitchener (1988) defined guidelines that should be identified or applied
before entering a relationship, to decide which dual roles pose high risk.
Her conceptualization of harm relates to the increasing divergence between
the two individuals in the relationship. The potential for greater misunder-
standing and harm increases with increasing incompatibility of expectations
between roles. Also, divided loyalties and loss of objectivity occur as obliga-
tions associated with different roles diverge. In addition, as power and
prestige between the psychologist's role and the other's role increase, the
potential for exploitation and lack of objectivity widens. Areas of sexual
intimacy and money are particularly high risk (Kitchener, 1988).
Gottlieb (1993) proposed an extension of this model. He concluded
that there is a need for a decision-making model, as the aspirational goal
of simply avoiding all dual relationships is unreasonable. The model uses
three dimensions: power, duration, and termination. Power refers to amount
or degree of power the psychologist has over the client, and thus the potential
for exploitation. Duration, an aspect of power, is based on the assumption
that power increases over time, so the length of time for which the relation-
ship has existed is relevant. Termination relates to the probability that the
client and the psychologist will have further professional contact. Gottlieb
outlined a five-step process of assessing the current relationship according
to the three dimensions, examining the contemplated relationship along
those three dimensions, identifying role incompatibilities, obtaining consul-
tation from a colleague, and discussing the decision with the client or
consumer, including the ethical issues and the possible adverse consequences.
Anderson and Kitchener (1998) criticized Gottlieb's (1993) model as
encouraging psychologists to overlook issues such as therapist motivation,
confidentiality, the amount of time elapsed between the termination of
therapy and the new relationship, and the effect of the new relationship
on the client's progress made in therapy. Burian and Slimp (2000) pointed
out that neither Kitchener's (1988) nor Gottlieb's (1993) model addressed
the impact of others at training sites who are not directly in the multiple
relationship. However, these models are useful to introduce in supervisee
training to incorporate approaches to decision making in potentially high
risk situations.
176 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Burian and Slimp (2000) proposed a decisiori'making model for deter-
mining whether to proceed with a potential dual relationship with a trainee
during the internship year. According to the model, there are three main
issues to consider: each party's reasons and motivations to be in the relation-
ship, the power differential between the staff member and intern, Likert
scales, and the parameters of the social activities. Through the use of a
decision tree (see Figure 7.1), the supervisor can obtain benefits of such
social interactions while reducing the potential for harm.
It is important to consider the following hierarchy given in the ACES
supervisory ethics guidelines (Association for Counselor Education and
Supervision, 1995):
An arrangement of priorities in decision-making:
Client welfare
Supervisee welfare
Supervisor welfare
Program or agency service and administrative needs
Haas and Malouf (1989) proposed a useful general rule: "Make the
fulfillment of personal needs subordinate to the needs of the client" (p. 64).
This rule should apply to supervisors and their supervisees as well. Even
though therapists or supervisors may find many situations emotionally gratify-
ing, the supervisors' needs should be carefully monitored and should not be
played out in the supervision.
Another useful guideline is to hold colleagues accountable. Approval
is implied when colleagues observe or learn of unethical behavior and do
nothing. Loyalty ties to colleagues, fear of personal costs or repercus-
sions, and insufficient understanding of the ethical guidelines are all cited as
reasons that misconduct may not be addressed between colleagues (Biaggio,
Duffy, & Shaffelbach, 1998). Failure to address misconduct imposes second-
ary harm on trainees who witness such infractions and their supervisors
doing nothing.
Gutheil and Gabbard (1993) advocated teaching limit-setting behavior
for instances when clients begin to cross boundaries. They cited examples
of clients who hug their therapists, who begin to take their clothes off, or
who wear clothes open in provocative ways. Limit-setting, calm statements
of the inappropriateness of the behavior in the therapy context, followed
by a discussion and processing, are advocated.
GENERAL ETHICAL PROBLEM-SOLVING APPROACHES
A variety of other models have been proposed to assist in problem
solving in situations that are not easily resolved by referring to law or ethics
ETHiCAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
177

I REASONS TO ENGAGE IN THE RELATIONSHIP |
1
Professional
Benefit of 
— N
Intern
Y
|
;s
Professional
Development
0 
of Staff
Member
Y
"
-No-*
Personal
Benefit of
Intern
1
Yes
1
Consult and
Proceed
with Caution
1
Personal
u 
Benefit of
~NO~* 
Staff
Member
1
Yes
(STOP
| 
PROFESSIONAL ROLE WITH INTERN |
LOCATION OF THE SOCIAL
RELATIONSHIP
Does the Activity Take Place More Than Once or Twice per Month?
I
Yes
^^
( STOP J
Figure 7.1. Supervisor decision-making model for determining whether to enter into
a dual relationship with a trainee. From "Social Dual-Role Relationships During
178
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

LIKERT SCALES
Intern's ability to leave the social relationship/activity without repercussions:
Freely exit
with no
repercussions
Mild repercussions
e.g., intern's
avoidance of staff
member
Moderate repercuss.,
e.g., intern's open
conflict with staff
member
Severe repercuss.,
e.g., intern's
impaired ability
to function
Profound repercuss.,
e.g., intern leaving
internship
prematurely
Probable impact on uninvolved interns:
No impact
Avoiding the
intern(s) or staff
member
Open conflict
w/ intern(s) or
staff member
Impaired ability
to function with
intem(s) or staff
member
Impaired service
to clients/patients
Probable impact on uninvolved staff members:
1-
No Impact
Avoiding the
staff member
or intern(s)
Open conflict
between staff
members or with
intern(s)
Impaired ability
to function with
intern(s) or staff
member
Impaired service
to clients/patients
If you have given a rating of 2 or higher on any of the above Liken Scales:
Internship: A Decision-Making Model," by B. K. Burian and A. O. Slimp, 2000,
Professional Psychology: Research and Practice, 31, pp. 332-338. Copyright 2000
by the American Psychological Association. Reprinted with permission.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES
179

codes (Corey, Corey, & Callahan, 2003; Koocher & Keith-Spiegel, 1998;
Tymchuk, 1986). These models are strongly advocated as structural tools
for training. Generally, the series of steps in such models includes identifica-
tion of the problem, interpretation, consultation, risk—benefit analysis, con-
sultation and referral to ethics codes and legal guidelines, consideration of
the five moral and ethical parameters described by Kitchener (1984), and
choice of a course of action after considering consequences of outcomes. For
example, Koocher and Keith-Spiegel's (1998) model, derived from Tymchuk
(1981) and Haas and Malouf (1989), contains the following steps:
1. Determine that the matter is an ethical one.
2. Consult available ethical guidelines that might apply, to pro-
vide a possible mechanism for resolution.
3. Consider all sources that might influence the decision you
will make.
4. Consult with a trusted colleague
5. Evaluate the rights, responsibilities, and vulnerability of all
affected parties.
6. Generate alternative decisions.
7. Enumerate the consequences of making each decision.
8. Make the decision.
9. Implement the decision.
N. D. Hansen and Goldberg (1999) proposed the use of a seven-
category matrix to approach ethical and legal dilemmas with considerations
of moral principles and personal values (competence, integrity, responsibil-
ity, respect, concerns for others' welfare, and social responsibility); clinical
and cultural factors; professional codes of ethics; agency or employer policies;
federal, state, and local statues; rules and regulations; and case law. By
arranging these considerations as a matrix rather than a hierarchy, this
approach builds in greater flexibility, depending on the ethical dilemma.
Interestingly, all of these models omit the component of emotional
response by the parties involved and by the person using the problem-
solving framework. A systematic model of ethical decision making was
originally developed for use in HIV-related ethical decisions, but has been
applied much more generally (Barret, Kitchener, & Burris, 2001). The steps
are as follows:
1. Pause and identify personal responses to the case.
2. Review the facts.
3. Conceptualize a preliminary plan.
4. Analyze the plan in terms of professional codes of ethics,
foundational ethical principles (e.g., autonomy, beneficence,
ISO 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

do no harm, fidelity, and justice) (Kitchener, 1984) to deter-
mine whether the plan is congruent.
5. Examine the legal consequences of the preliminary plan.
6. Refine the plan to balance clinical, ethical, and legal consider-
ations so that it
• is congruent with one's personal values,
• advances clinical interests as possible,
• is operable within agency policies and professional ethics
codes,
• minimizes harm to client and relevant others,
• maximizes the effect of all other ethical principles to the
greatest extent possible, and
• operates within the law.
7. Choose a course of action and share it with the client.
8. Implement the course of action, and monitor and document
the outcomes.
Consultation and documentation are essential parts of this model
as well.
The advantages of Barret et al.'s (2001) model are the integration of
emotional response the provision of a complete review format to identify
and resolve ethical dilemmas within multiple relevant contexts (e.g., legal,
ethical, moral, personal). In the case of supervisor—supervisee dilemmas,
Steps 1 and 6 necessitate multilevel considerations of supervisor, supervisee,
and client.
Kitchener's (2000) protocol is different in that possible options and
alternative plans are generated in Step 3. Her Step 7 entails the reassessment
of options and identification of a plan, and at the conclusion (Step 9) she
advocates reflection on the outcome of the decision, so that its lessons may
be applied in the future.
INTEGRATING CULTURE INTO EVERY STEP OF
DECISION MAKING
Culture was not explicitly included as a factor in any of the aforemen-
tioned decision-making models. In articulating how cultural considerations
must be integrated into the decision-making model, Ridley, Liddle, Hill,
and Li (2001) encouraged flexibility in representing ethical concerns and
determining whether a cultural conflict is implicit or explicit in the ethical
issue. Implicit cultural assumptions must be made explicit and factored into
the decision-making process both from the personal perspective and from
the systemic perspective.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
181

ETHICS TRAINING
There is significant concern that our current teaching of ethics does
not generalize adequately to actual therapy situations. In an article titled,
"Problems with Ethics Training by Osmosis," Handelsman (1986) described
how the informal teaching of ethics by supervisor to supervisee is fraught
with peril. If, as Tymchuk et al. (1995) reported, almost 60% of doctoral-
level psychologists felt inadequately informed about ethical issues, then
leaving the substantive training of ethics to these same individuals in the
course of their supervision is erroneous. Welfel (1995) reported that 67%
of clinical'psychology programs had a formal structure for the teaching of
ethics, and Houseman and Stake (1999) found that 94% of students in
clinical programs had had an average of six hours training in sexual ethics.
However, even though trainees or supervisors may have had course content
in ethics, it does not follow that they are using it clinically, connecting it
to real-life experience, or making a conscious decision to do what they
ethically should.
A framework derived from Rest (1984) provides insight into the breach.
Failure to act ethically is defined as a deficiency in one of four component
parts. The first component is interpreting the situation as a moral one.
This component entails recognizing ethical dimensions of situations in the
context of other aspects (e.g., clinical or pragmatic), including how one's
actions affect the welfare of others. The second component is deciding
which course of action is just, right, or fair. It involves moral reasoning to
differentiate ethical choices from unethical choices. The third component
is deciding what one intends to do, which entails choosing whether to carry
out the ethical action in the face of competing forces. Finally, the fourth
component is implementing the moral action, or carrying it out despite
costs to self or external pressures to act otherwise. Rest (1984) noted that
it requires ego strength to take such actions.
It may be that the very concept of ethics training is flawed in that
the trainee is attuned to ethics only as examples of dilemmas are presented
in the context of a particular seminar. It is a much more difficult task to
identify ethical issues within the broader spectrum of day-to-day clinical
activities—that is, to determine which events or issues are ethical ones and
then proceeding to act accordingly. In our own supervision, we have noted
that, immediately after the conclusion of an ethics training sequence with
highly trained supervisees, very similar dilemmas to those just studied arose
and were not identified in the clinical caseloads of our trainees, but came
to light only incidentally in supervision. In support of this finding, Welfel
(1992) described several unpublished studies in which trainees had only
moderate rates of identifying ethical dilemmas from general clinical material.
182 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Beyond identification, supervisors must model implementation of the proper
action, which may not be popular.
A formulation (Handelsman et al., 2002) derived from Berry's (1990)
acculturation framework is useful in explaining some of the pitfalls in our
current ethics training. Essentially, our questions are, Do trainees retain
their original moral and ethical values and traditions as they move into and
through graduate training, and how do they identify and adopt the ethics
and values of professional psychology? Berry (1990) provided four categories
of development: professional assimilation, or adopting the professional psy-
chology ethics and discarding one's own values; separation, or maintaining
one's own values and having low levels of identification with the professional
code or values; marginalization, or having both an undeveloped personal
moral sense and a low internalized professional ethical sense; and integration,
or both maintaining one's moral and ethical values and adopting the profes-
sional codes. Handelsman et al. (2002) lead us to believe that, unless trainees
integrate their own ethical identity with professional psychology's ethical
identity, through acculturation, trainees may be at higher risk for ethical
difficulty. The important lesson of this conclusion for training is that trainees'
personal ethical and moral codes should be encouraged, highlighted, and
valued rather than discounted in favor of total reliance on the professional
codes of ethics. This area warrants empirical investigation.
Areas for which training directors have reported intern ethical
competency as lowest are HIV-positive clients, fee-setting arrangements,
involuntary commitment, and therapy with gays and lesbians, whereas
confidentiality has been rated as an area of high competence (a finding
incongruous with the self-reports of supervisees [Fly et al., 1997]). According
to Welfel's (1992) study, 63% of training directors had seen improvement
in interns' ethics abilities in the previous few years. They recommended
increasing the focus on clinical application of ethical principles, using case
studies more often to discuss ethics, and paying more attention to dual-
relationship issues (Welfel, 1992). Plante (1995) proposed a model for
training predoctoral interns and postdoctoral fellows in practical, applied
ethics and professional issues.
In addition to more adequate training, an environment of safety needs
to be maintained within the therapy setting and in supervision (Rodolfa
et al., 1994). Such an environment includes the absence of sexual harassment
and innuendo, so that disclosure can occur comfortably.
Ironically, the emotions of psychologists have also been overlooked
in training. Pope and Tabachnick (1993) reported that respondents to their
survey rated graduate training regarding fear, anger, and sexual arousal as
inadequate. Fear can be elicited by the possibility of client suicide, client
deterioration, or risk of the client attacking a third party, for example.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
183

Anger may be directed toward the client for being uncooperative. Over half
of the respondents reported feeling sexually aroused in the presence of a
client. We have noted the omission of emotion from decision-making proto-
cols and from many training contexts as a possible reason that clinicians
do not act as they know they should in ethical dilemmas. This area warrants
immediate attention and intervention.
MALPRACTICE
Increased attention has recently been paid to supervisor liability and
malpractice. Pivotal to the concern is the principle of respondent superior,
or vicarious liability. This term refers to the legal doctrine which holds that
"one who occupies a position of authority or direct control over another
(such as a master and servant, employer and employee, or supervisor and
supervisee) can be held legally liable for the damages of another suffered
as a result of the negligence of the subordinate" (Disney & Stephens, 1994,
p. 15). Thus, liability can be based on a supervisor's erroneous actions
or omissions, even if the intern was the therapist seeing the client and
implementing the intervention. Malpractice is a form of negligence and is
therefore a tort (Behnke et al., 1998). A tort refers to negligent or intentional
wrongs to a party, resulting in civil lawsuits for which another party may
be financially liable (Stromberg et al., 1988). A malpractice lawsuit is de-
scribed as consisting of "four D's": "Dereliction of a Duty Directly causing
Damages." Demonstration that all four "D's" are present by a preponderance
of evidence is essential for a successful malpractice suit (Behnke et al., 1998).
Direct liability could arise from the supervisor's inattention to the trainee's
comments or from the supervisor's failing to carry out supervision. To help
avert this problem, the supervisor should know the level of skill of the
supervisee (Harrar, VandeCreek, & Knapp, 1990).
In 1980, Slovenko predicted that litigation involving supervisors might
be the "suit of the future" (p. 468). If malpractice insurance rates for psycho-
logists are any indication, this prediction has been proven to have some
validity. In 1990, APAIT data revealed that the probability of a psychologist
being sued was less than half of 1% (Bennett, Bryant, VandenBos, & Green-
wood, 1990). In contrast, Pope and Tabachnick (1993) found that 11.6% of
their respondents reported that at least one malpractice lawsuit or complaint
against them had been filed. M. Miller (2002) stated that the possibility of an
adverse disciplinary event is 10 to 15% during a 15-year career. Montgomery,
Cupit, and Wimberley (1999) reconciled the differences in these reports
by explaining that insurance data may not include malpractice lawsuits
dismissed, dropped, or settled, as well as data on uninsured practitioners.
Furthermore, different statistical methods are applied to malpractice suits,
J 84 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

disciplinary actions, and complaints. Welch (2000) cautioned that "malprac-
tice lawsuits and licensing board complaints represent a serious threat to
the welfare of psychologists" (p. xiv).
It is important to bear in mind the differing burden of proof across
contexts. For example, it must be established that harm was done to the
plaintiff for damages to be awarded in a malpractice suit. However, a licensing
board can discipline professionals for improper conduct without harm having
been inflicted. Licensing boards have a much broader range of admissible
evidence (hearsay and prior acts, for example) than does the court (N. D.
Hansen & Goldberg, 1999).
Although the ACES Ethical Guidelines for Supervisors (Association
for Counselor Education and Supervision, 1995) have not been adopted by
the American Psychological Association, a psychologist who is facing legal
proceedings regarding supervision may encounter these documents and the
related standards in cross-examination in the courtroom. The psychologist
should have a rationale for why documents and standards don't apply if he
or she is not in compliance with them (Younggren, personal communication,
2002). Standard of care for supervision are determined by available guide-
lines, the law, and practices in the community.
A small, but growing, number of malpractice suits arise from failure to
supervise adequately (Sherry, 1991). C. L. Guest and Dooley (1999) pre-
dicted that malpractice litigation brought against supervisors by super-
visees may be significant in the future of risk management. To date,
psychotherapist-patient sexual violations are the major source of financial
loss in malpractice suits (Pope & Vasquez, 1998) and are increasingly excluded
from malpractice insurance coverage.
Bennett et al. (1990) described four criteria of malpractice:
1. A professional relationship was formed between the psychologist
and the client. Only thus does a practitioner incur a legal
duty of care.
2. There is a demonstrable standard of care, and the practitioner
breached that standard. He or she is said to have practiced
"below the standard of care."
3. The client suffered harm or injury, which must be demonstrated
and established.
4. The practitioner's breach of duty to practice within the stan-
dard of care was the proximate cause of the client's injury; that
is, the injury was a reasonably foreseeable consequence of the
breach, (p. 35, emphasis in original)
C. L. Guest and Dooley (1999) further refined these concepts in the
context of supervision. For the first criterion, relationship, they suggested
that the legal duty was established through an implied contract on the
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
185

supervisee's acceptance by the supervisor. They cited Kurpius et al. (1991),
who concluded that transference, countertransference, power, dependency,
dual relationships, and stereotyping are all ethical issues involved in the
supervisory relationship and have counterparts in client-therapist relation-
ships. For the second criterion, standard of care, C. L. Guest and Dooley
(1999) referred to ethical codes and standards for supervision, including
ACES. A breach of standard of care might then be any deviation from the
established set of standards. Overextension beyond the supervisee's level
of competence, dual relationships, and boundary violations were cited as
examples of the third criterion, or harm. Finally, for the fourth criterion,
to establish the supervisor as the proximate cause of harm, it is necessary
to prove the aspect of reasonable forseeability (Bennett et al., 1990; C. L.
Guest & Dooley, 1999).
For the special case of supervisory malpractice, Disney and Stephens
(1994) further clarified factors that aid in the determination of whether the
supervisee's alleged negligence implicates the supervisor. These factors are
as follows:
• the supervisor's power to control the supervisee (e.g., ability
to control the supervisee on the basis of administrative authority
or ability to gain knowledge of what is being done);
• the supervisee's duty to perform the act (e.g., failure to perform
an act or perform in a manner that a reasonable supervisor in
the same situation would assume);
• the time, place, and purpose of the act (e.g., during formal
supervision or within the course and scope of the relationship);
• the motivation of the supervisee for committing the act (e.g.,
beneficence or malfeasance);
• whether the supervisor could have reasonably expected that
the supervisee would commit the act. (pp. 15-16).
The fifth factor is related to forseeability, in the sense of whether the
act would be reasonably expected to result in harm. Also to be considered
is standard of care in supervision, or what a reasonable professional would
do in the same circumstances (Falvey, 2002).
Another consideration in malpractice is the supervisor's responsibility
to carry out supervision. This responsibility includes diligence or supervising
on a regular basis, awareness of what transpires in the therapy sessions, and
provision of adequate supervision (see also the section Competency in
Supervision, this chapter). In particular, supervisors engaged in dual, sexual
relationships with their supervisees are vulnerable to vicarious liability or
direct liability, because the supervision was inadequate or because the super-
visee felt abused or unfairly evaluated after receiving less than positive
186 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

feedback after the termination of the dual relationship (Slimp & Burian,
1994).
Some risk management specialists urge, especially in the case of third-
party payment, that the supervisor have a face-to-face contact with the
client on at least one occasion. Cormier and Bernard (1982) suggested that
giving the client the opportunity to meet the supervisor and learn about
the supervision gives the supervisor additional, firsthand information about
the client and the level of supervision required. It also provides a channel
of communication in the case of client dissatisfaction or other trouble. If
the supervisor learns that a supervisee is having difficulty with a particular
client, the supervisor must take steps to increase the amount of supervision
or other actions in response to the difficulty. It is critical to remember that
the goal of treatment is to protect the welfare of the client and do no harm.
The "borrowed-servant" rule, a legal term, relates to situations in which
a university places a student in another setting, perhaps a community mental
health center. Supervisory liability may be shared between the university
and the other setting. Saccuzzo (2002) described that the university would
be considered the general employer, whereas the placement site would be
the special employer. If a negligent act occurs, the task is to determine
which employer had control of the supervisee, by examining affiliation
agreements that define the conditions of placement. Saccuzzo (2002) sug-
gested that, if no such agreements exist, the university may be liable as the
general employer. It is thus extremely important to have clearly defined
relationships between training institutions and placements.
Montgomery et al. (1999) reported a very important finding regarding
supervision practices and liability: Respondents to their survey did not
recognize negligent clinical supervision or incorrect diagnosis as potential
sources of malpractice liability. In fact, the largest category of complaints
(over 20%) reportedly filed with state licensing boards dealt with supervisory
issues, such as the supervisee's performance with clients and the relationship
between the supervisee and the supervisor. Respondents instead recognized
the high-risk categories of sexual misconduct with a client; failure to warn,
with resulting injury; child custody case decisions; and client suicide as
potential sources of malpractice liability. Although over 70% of the respon-
dents knew a colleague who had had a complaint filed against him or her
with the state licensing board, only 14% had actually been threatened with
a complaint themselves. Most (over 70%) thought it was highly unlikely
that they would have a malpractice lawsuit filed against them at any point
in their career.
A case involving forseeability in child psychiatry and psychoanalytic
training is Almonte v. New York Medical College (1994). The U.S. District
Court for the District of Connecticut found that the supervisor has a duty
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
187

to the clients of the supervisee if there is reasonable forseeability of harm.
In this case, the resident disclosed to his psychoanalyst that he was a
pedophile (that he had such fantasies which the court construed to constitute
pedophilia) and that he planned to practice child psychiatry. The psychoana-
lyst, who was a school faculty member, was found to have had the responsibil-
ity to inform the school that the resident had not successfully completed
his analysis, a requirement for graduation, or to take reasonable steps to
prevent the resident from taking up a child practice. These steps could
have been taken without compromising the confidentiality of the resident's
disclosures (Falvey, 2002; Garamella v. New York Medical College, 1998; "Jury
finds," October 9, 1998).
Disney and Stephens (1994) discussed the growing number of malprac-
tice claims alleging sexual relations or other unethical boundary crossings
between supervisees and clients. They urged supervisors to have a formal
policy in place, in writing, in which each supervisee is informed of the legal
and ethical standards and consequences of such actions. This statement
must be signed as understood by the supervisee. In addition, there should
be practices in place for case review, treatment planning, and a review of
goals set for and the ongoing progress of each client. As supervisees, like
supervisors, are held to a standard of ethics of their profession, it is a standard
of practice for these ethics to be incorporated into and articulated as a
minimum ethical standard. Andrews v. United States (1982), cited by Harrar
et al. (1990), is an example of a physician supervisor who did not adequately
investigate a report that a physician's assistant was having a sexual relation-
ship with a patient. By not speaking with the patient, conducting a thorough
investigation, or filing a written report, the supervisor was found liable. Had
the supervision been proper, the relationship would have been terminated
and the emotional harm prevented (Bray, cited by Falvey, 2002).
C. L. Guest and Dooley (1999) expressed concern that potential or
current supervisors will be frightened away from supervision by the threat
of liability. They urged that the same risk management procedures used in
one's practice be used in supervision. They especially urged that attention
be paid to the slippery slopes of dual relationships, competence, accountabil-
ity, and contracting, with the goal of supervising as one would like to live,
with honesty, integrity, and responsibility.
DUTY TO WARN AND DUTY TO PROTECT
Ultimate responsibility in duty-to-warn cases lies with the supervisor,
to ensure that full responsibility for diagnosis and treatment has been as-
sumed. It is essential that the supervisor document steps taken. It is critical
for supervisors to understand completely the privilege statutes, duty-to-warn-
188 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

and-protect concept, and confidentiality status of the state(s) in which one
practices. Supervisors should bear in mind that what is required as far as
breaching confidentiality as part of the duty to warn in one state may be
prohibited in other states (Herlihy & Sheeley, 1988).
Tarasoff 
v. Regents of University of California (1976), the case that
established duty to warn, stands at the forefront. A less attended-to part of
the Tarasoff case is that the supervisor was found liable, along with the
psychologist, for failing to take steps to warn and protect the client. The
plaintiffs attorney later acknowledged that if the supervisor of the clinic
had examined the patient (Poddar) himself and made a determination that
he was not dangerous to himself or others, there would have been no cause
of action under forseeability (Slovenko, 1980). However, he did not and
instead disregarded his staffs medical records. What protects a therapist
from liability is the capacity to identify what specific values are relevant to
a particular circumstance and to apply those values thoughtfully to a problem
that lacks a clear answer (Behnke et al., 1998). It is important for the trainee
to understand that the duty to protect arises only when the victim is
identifiable, could be identifiable after "a moment's reflection," (p. 345) or
is part of an identifiable class of reasonably foreseeable victims (Vandecreek
&. Knapp, 2001). In the case of Tarasoff, the supervisee, entitled to the
psychotherapist-patient privilege, a special relationship, must hear the com-
munication of a specific threat of serious physical violence (with intent and
ability to carry out the threat) against a reasonably identifiable victim
(Behnke et al., 1998). Hedlund v. The Superior Court of Orange County
(1983) extended the definition of victim to anyone who is foreseeably at
risk—in that case, the child of the individual (the mother) who should
have been warned. The court ruled that the child was identifiable as someone
who might be injured if the mother was attacked, as one of the people in
close proximity.
In instances in which the supervisee should have been aware of poten-
tial danger, there is a significant risk factor if a novice trainee is responsible
for implementation of the requisite steps. It is imperative the supervisor
monitor very closely or even work along with the supervisee under such
difficult circumstances. It is important to remember that the entire process
is predicated by a very specific set of behaviors identified by the supervisee.
One less understood part of Tarasoff is that there is a "duty to warn, protect,
and predict" (Behnke et al., 1998, p. 21). Making reasonable efforts to
communicate the expressed threat to the victim(s) and to the police as well
as developing action steps for the client fulfill the duty.
In]ablonski v. United States (1983), at issue was the failure to obtain past
medical records or to interview relevant individuals regarding the client's
potential for violence. The case also highlighted the critical nature of
communication among professionals regarding high-risk clinical situations.
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
189

In Peck v. the Counseling Service of Addison County (1985), the counselor
did not take seriously a client's threat to burn down his parents' barn, did
not consult her supervisor, and did not issue any warnings. The counseling
center was found negligent, as there were no written policies or procedures
for when a client constitutes a significant danger. The counselor was also
found negligent, as she did not take an adequate history, consult her supervi-
sor, or obtain past medical records quickly (Harrar et al., 1990).
A series of steps compiled from multiple sources (Herlihy & Sheeley,
1988; VandeCreek & Knapp, 2001) can be adapted as steps to introduce
to trainees in duty-to-warn-and-protect situations. These steps include warn-
ing the intended victim, increasing frequency of treatment, referring for
changing or adding appropriate medication, making plans to eliminate access
of the client to a lethal weapon, dealing with aggression in the treatment,
subjecting the client to involuntary commitment, notifying the police, con-
sulting with colleagues, and documenting every step of every action the
supervisor and supervisee take. Chenneville (2000) provided guidelines
dealing with duty to protect in the case of HIV.
Supervisees should be introduced to state-of-the-art techniques for
assessment of risk (Rosenberg, 1999) and for management of violent clients
(J. C. Beck, 1987; Borum, 1996; Tishler, Gordon, & Landry-Meyer, 2000),
as almost half of all psychotherapists are threatened, physically attacked,
or harassed by clients at some time in their career (Guy, Brown, & Poelstra,
1992), with supervisees and those licensed less than five years at greater
risk. Supervisees also need to learn suicide risk assessment (Kleespies, Penk,
& Forsyth, 1993) and guidelines for working with potentially violent clients
(VandeCreek & Knapp, 1993), two other neglected areas in graduate train-
ing (Bongar &. Harmatz, 1991).
As graduate training in dealing with feelings of anger, fear, and sexual
arousal has been determined to be inadequate, and as any of these feelings
could increase stress and potential burnout, these topics are areas of concern.
Specifically, fear of a client committing suicide, fear that a client could get
worse, anger at a client for being uncooperative, or fear that a client will
attack a third party was so severe that it affected the eating, sleeping, or
concentration of over half of the therapists who responded to Pope and
Tabachnick's (1993) study.
Kleespies et al. (1993) reported that 40% of psychology trainees experi-
enced a client's suicide or suicide attempt during their training. Coping
with the aftermath is highly stressful and traumatic, more so the earlier in
the training sequence it occurs (Kleespies et al., 1993). Preparation for this
eventuality as well as for all the other categories of danger is essential.
Preparation could take the form of presentation of vignettes, presentation
of actual cases, and group problem-solving and processing exercises. Kleespies
and Dettmer (2000) cautioned against defensive supervision in the instance
190 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

of trainee debriefings or postmortem case reviews should a suicide occur.
Such a strategy might be geared toward fear that such information would
be revealed in legal proceedings. Kleespies and Dettmer (2000) urged support
and learning to ensue in the aftermath of such an event.
In Cohen v. State of New York (1975), a first-year psychiatric resident
released a client who had documented suicidal risk. The client killed himself
the same day. The court found that the unsupervised resident did not possess
enough skill or judgment for reasonable treatment and was acting beyond
his competence. Therefore, the decisions of student therapists need to be
reviewed and altered as determined by the supervisor (Moline, Williams,
& Austin, 1998).
DOCUMENTATION
Harrar et al. (1990) stated, "Just as practitioners maintain case records
on their clients to document their services, it would be prudent for supervisors
to also document their supervisory work" (p. 38). And Falvey (2002) cau-
tioned that "[documentation is no longer an option in supervision" (p. 117).
Besides being a measure of professional accountability, establishment of
whether, for example, a liability claim meets criteria for malpractice
documentation is definitely a risk management strategy. Documentation on
supervisees includes the supervisory contract, the supervisee's application
materials (or, at minimum, a curriculum vitae), all performance evaluations
that have been conducted, and a monitoring log. The log could consist of
a list of cases the supervisee is carrying; dates of supervision of each; when
supervision actually occurred; presentation of problems and critical issues;
directives or directions the supervisee is following in treatment; changes in
the diagnosis or treatment plan; discussions of case progress; details of safety,
ethical, legal, or risk management concerns raised and their resolution;
follow-up reports on previous interventions or concerns; details of supervi-
sory or supervisee problems and their resolution; and supervisee attendance
records for supervision appointments and any associated make-up informa-
tion. If past or present medical records, audiotapes, videotapes, or assessment
reports are reviewed, this factor should be noted in the recommendations
the supervisor makes (Bernstein & Hartsell, 1998; Bridge &. Bascue, 1990).
There should also be a termination summary documenting circumstances
of termination, as well as recommendations or referrals and follow-up by
the supervisee (Falvey, 2002).
Like progress notes, supervision notes should be objective, nonjudg-
mental, nonderogatory, clear, and concrete (Stromberg et al., 1988). Falvey
(2002) recommended that, as there is no statute of limitations regarding
complaints of professional ethics, supervisory records should be kept as long
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
191

as clinical records are required to be kept in one's particular state—anywhere
from 5 to 30 years. In their guidelines for record keeping, APA suggests
that records be retained for a minimum of 3 years after the last contact with
the client. Records or a summary of the records is then maintained an
additional 12 years before disposal.
Letters of Recommendation
Ethical and legal issues arise in writing letters of recommendation.
Such letters are extremely influential and among the most important criteria
for selection for internships and multiple other settings (Grote, Robiner,
& Haut, 2001). Writing such a letter is an informed-consent issue, as students
may be asked to protect the confidentiality of the writer by waiving rights
to review the letter before they have an indication of what the contents
will be (Ford, 2001). Some agencies and institutions refuse to write letters of
recommendation beyond a simple statement verifying dates of employment,
because of concerns about legal jeopardy. It has even been suggested that
a balanced, accurate letter can appear negative because of the preponderance
of inflated letters that are exaggerated and unrealistic in their claims (R. K.
Miller & Van Rybroek, 1988). If a letter of recommendation includes any
negative evaluation, even if the letter is predominantly positive, it is very
likely to result in the applicant's rejection (Koocher & Keith-Spiegel, 1998).
This tendency exists because the predominance of letters of recommendation
are extremely glowing and positive, resulting in "letter inflation" (Range,
Menyhert, Walsh, Hardin, Craddick, & Ellis, 1991, p. 390). In fact, a major-
ity of supervisors (53%) in one study believed that they had written letters
of recommendation which were biased. Only 5% of the respondents believed
supervisors' letters were not biased (Robiner, Saltzman, Hoberman, Semrud-
Clikeman, & Schirvar, 1997).
An ethical progression is to model integrity by discussing with the
individual what will be contained in the letter, especially should there be
areas of weakness or concern. An ethical dilemma for the supervisor regards
the obligation to communicate accurate information to colleagues or institu-
tions in the interests of the profession of psychology. The writer of the
recommendation may also be at risk for failing to disclose negative or
dangerous facts. In fact, Grote et al. (2001) reported that nearly half (46.5%)
of their respondents (return rates of 64% and 78%) said that they would
refuse to write a letter for a student they knew had alcohol or drug abuse
problems, whereas a "nontrivial minority" of respondents (12.4%) indicated
that they would exclude all mention of alcohol and drug abuse problems
from their letter of recommendation (p. 658). They also reported significant
rates of respondents who would exclude mention of the applicant's anxiety
192 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION
