or depression (43.2%), motivation (14-1%), and interpersonal problems
(13.2%).
R. K. Miller and Van Rybroek (1988) proposed guidelines for what a
helpful letter might contain. These elements include a caveat about how
many letters overstate desirable qualities, and the writer's intent to avoid that
trap by highlighting strengths and weaknesses in specific skills, experience,
commitments, and traits; examples or reasons that the individual should be
selected over others; and suggestions of the types of internship experiences
that the candidate might most benefit from. Grote et al. (2001) urged use
of Likert scales rather than binary yes-no decisions. They suggested an
acknowledgment in all letters of recommendation that "no applicant is
perfect and that the writer will describe some areas of personal or professional
growth that the applicant should work toward in his or her internship year"
(p. 659-660). We urge movement toward standardization with inclusion of
details on the scope of experience with the supervisee, mention of Grote's
recommendations and one's relationship with the supervisee (e.g., primary
supervisor or director of training), description of the context of the relation-
ship (e.g., internship or professional organization), discussion of the special
skills or attributes the supervisee would bring to the setting, and clear
description of what was supervised. If one is not able to write a positive
letter for a supervisee, this factor should have been dealt with in ongoing
supervision, but needs to be clearly discussed with the supervisee.
As the APA Ethical Principles of Psychologists and Code of Conduct
states in Principle C, Integrity, "Psychologists seek to promote accuracy,
honesty, and truthfulness in the science, teaching and practice of psychology.
In these activities psychologists do not steal, cheat, or engage in fraud,
subterfuge, or intentional misrepresentation of fact" (American Psychologi-
cal Association, 2002a, p. 4). Section 7.06 (b) of the same document states,
"Psychologists evaluate students and supervisee on the basis of their actual
performance on relevant and established program requirements" (American
Psychological Association, 2002a).
RISK MANAGEMENT
The major components of supervisory risk management have been
outlined in this chapter. Adherence to informed consent, competency,
confidentiality, due process, duty to warn, and the approach of taking reason-
able steps to think through and document the process in identified situations
are sound preventative steps. Both legally and with respect to common
sense, the supervisor needs to do what a reasonable supervisor would do under
the particular set of circumstances. The ethical problem-solving models
ETHICAL AND LEGAL PERSPECTIVES 
193

described in this chapter provide a framework for determining appropriate
actions; the step entailing consultation with a colleague or colleagues is
particularly important. Harris (2002) advocated "worst case thinking," or
considering the worst possible outcomes of the scenario in question. This
technique is very useful in preparing trainees for sessions during times of
high uncertainty or crisis.
Competencies
The competencies for addressing ethical and legal considerations are as follows:
• Supervisors function within their areas of competency in all clinical practice
and supervision
• Supervisors have knowledge and training in ethics of mental health
professions and conduct themselves in a manner that models such behavior.
This competency encompasses all areas of ethical functioning, including
boundary definition
• Supervisors have knowledge of laws and regulations of the mental health
disciplines and conduct themselves accordingly. They seek consultation as
needed
• Supervisors develop goals and contracts with supervisees and translate these
objectives into training, giving ongoing constructive feedback and evaluation
and documenting all parts of the process
194 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

8
EVALUATION OF THE
SUPERVISORY PROCESS
Feedback and evaluation are core components of psychology training
programs. However, they are two of the most difficult areas in psychology
training. Evaluation has been described as "typically a weak suit for most
supervisors" (Cormier & Bernard, 1982, p. 490). Ironically, as psychologists,
we pride ourselves on our training in research, methodology, psychodiagnos-
tics, and evaluation, yet find that in the area of evaluation of our students—
and ourselves—our techniques are sorely lacking, as is our will to do the task.
In this chapter, we introduce a protocol for evaluation. First, we discuss
the role of evaluation in psychology training, in terms of both the current
state of the art and aspirations for its future. We then define the psychologist's
role as evaluator and describe specific types of evaluation. In particular, we
devote attention to qualitative versus quantifiable forms of evaluation and
to the focus of evaluation: assessment of the client interactions between
the client and the supervisee-therapist and among the client, supervisee-
therapist, and supervisor, obtained through observation, assessment-of-
process, and client-outcomes measures. Next, we discuss the variant of
manualized treatment evaluation. Nuances that differentiate formative and
summative evaluation, including examples of frames, are laid out as steps
in the development of competency-based criteria that use an interwoven
contract as a centerpiece. We then present 360-degree evaluation as an
alternative to supervisor evaluation and discuss contextual factors that
J95

influence evaluation and satisfaction of supervisees. Relevant ethical issues
introduced in evaluation or in lack of an evaluation process are significant
factors. We also briefly discuss admissions criteria for psychology training
and licensure programs. Finally, we examine aspects of dealing with a super-
visee with problematic behavior as defined through the evaluation process,
including identification, remediation, addressing of legal issues, dismissal,
and preventative strategies. In this analysis, we do not neglect the problem-
atic supervisor or program evaluation, factors that only recently have re-
ceived attention in the context of supervision.
REASONS FOR DIFFICULTY IN EVALUATION
The reasons for the evaluation deficit seem multifaceted. First, there
is the perceived incongruity between developing a supportive supervisory
relationship or alliance and then giving negative feedback. Central to this
problem is the belief that feedback may disturb the unmitigated positive
regard in the relationship (Hahn & Molnar, 1991) or otherwise disrupt the
relationship. Ladany, Ellis, et al. (1999) suggested that evaluation may even
moderate the relationship between working alliance and supervision out-
come, such that, for example, a trainee may not self-disclose relevant personal
information, out of the fear that doing so may adversely affect his or her
evaluation. However, effective evaluation practices appear to be positively
associated with and predictive of a stronger working alliance (Lehrman-
Waterman & Ladany, 2001). Because most evaluations are positive (Robiner,
Saltzman, Hoberman, Semrud-Clikeman, et al., 1997), it is even more diffi-
cult to provide negative evaluations.
Second, there is a profound misunderstanding of the task of evaluation
in training: Evaluation is viewed as punitive and worrisome, whereas it
should be viewed simply as part of the effective learning process and as a
method of dealing with problematic behavior and remediation in a small
minority of cases. Multiple studies cited in chapter 2, this volume, reported
that trainees viewed high levels of feedback and evaluation as a highly
desirable characteristic of supervision (Gandolfo & Brown, 1987; Henderson
etal., 1999; Leddick & Dye, 1987; C. D. Miller & Getting, 1966;
Nerdrum & Ronnestad, 2002). However, the differences in the supervisory
role between giving formative (ongoing) and summative evaluations are
complex.
Third, evaluation has typically been a unidirectional process, given
from supervisor to supervisee, rather than bidirectional. However, it is impor-
tant to consider the impact of supervisees' evaluations of supervisors on the
relationship and on the supervisees' satisfaction. Potentially, such evalua-
196 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

tions would provide supervisors with feedback on their own performance
and effectiveness, creating a spiral of supervisory improvement.
Fourth, Robiner et al. (1993) have done an admirable job outlining
the myriad reasons that we convince ourselves to avoid, be lenient in, or
inflate evaluation. They described the definitional and measurement issues,
including lack of clear criteria and definition of competency; legal and
administrative issues, such as fear of liability, fear of institutional censure,
concern for program status, and concern for institutional reputation; inter-
personal issues, including fear of diminished rapport or damaging a trainee's
career; and supervisor issues, such as a wish to avoid scrutiny of one's own
work, inexperience with or minimization of impairment, low assertiveness,
a wish to avoid the time and energy expenditure required in the effort, and
inappropriate optimism. Norcross, Stevenson, and Nash (1986) found time
constraints, inadequate measures and methods, lack of personnel, and insuf-
ficient funding to be primary obstacles, rather than staff resistance and
theoretical disparity. Much traditional evaluation to date has been single-
measure, supervisor-reported, and often global evaluation (Hahn &. Molnar,
1991) or measurement of a single, global factor (Newman & Scott, 1988).
In terms of methodology, without the use of observation of therapy, videotape
review, or a 360-degree procedure, the validity of the evaluation may be
compromised; discomfort on the part of both parties when feedback is based
on small segments of data is warranted. In addition, few supervisors have been
formally trained in supervision, and the majority feels less than adequately
prepared to work with "unsuitable" interns (Robiner, Saltzman, Hoberman,
& Schirvar, 1997).
Last, there is the underlying reality that negative evaluation of a
supervisee may lead to remediation plans and possibly culminate in the
supervisee's dismissal from the program (Olkin & Gaughen, 1991), thus
adding the role of judge to that of supervisor.
That evaluation is a critical part of supervision is unequivocal. One
need only look at the APA Guidelines and Principles for Accreditation of
Programs in Professional Psychology to confirm this condition (American
Psychological Association, Committee on Accreditation, 2002e):
At the time of admission, the program provides interns with written
policies and procedures regarding program requirements and expecta-
tions for interns' performance and continuance in the program and
procedures for the termination of students. Interns receive, at least
semiannually, written feedback on the extent to which they are meeting
these requirements and performance expectations. The feedback should
address the intern's performance and progress in terms of professional
conduct and psychological knowledge, skills and competencies in the
areas of psychological assessment, intervention, and consultation. Such
feedback should include:
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
197

Timely written notification of all problems that have been noted
and the opportunity to discuss them, guidance regarding steps to remedi-
ate all problems (if remediable); and substantive written feedback on
the extent to which corrective actions are or are not successful in
addressing the areas of concern.
Further confirmation of this point is given by section 7.06, "Assessing
Student and Supervisee Performance," of the APA Ethical Principles of
Psychologists and Code of Conduct 7.06 (American Psychological Associa-
tion, 2002a)
(a) In academic and supervisory relationships, psychologists establish
a timely and specific process for providing feedback to students and
supervisees. Information regarding the process is provided to the student
at the beginning of supervision.
(b) Psychologists evaluate students and supervisees on the basis of their
actual performance on relevant and established program requirements.
Together, these guidelines leave no doubt that evaluation, feedback,
and clear performance expectations need to be the hallmark of psychology
training. However, evidence reveals a significant schism between what
should be a competence of psychologists and what actually occurs in practice.
STATE OF THE ART
Even though it would be reasonable to expect a comparable level of
methodological rigor for assessment of supervisees and peers as that required
for client assessments, that has not been the case. In a review of psychometric
properties of existing competency assessment tools, Scofield and Yoxtheimer
(1983) concluded that existing measures were lacking in reliability and
validity of data. The area most frequently assessed was interpersonal compe-
tencies, including empathy, expertness, interpersonal nonverbal responses,
and overall therapeutic effectiveness. Ponterotto and Furlong (1985) ex-
tended the inquiry into rating scales used to assess competency of therapists,
concluding that use of the rating scales was "based more on convention
than on sound psychometric evidence" (p. 614). Rater bias has been shown
to be significant. Rater bias in evaluation includes leniency (giving ratings
that are more positive than warranted), the central tendency (the tendency
to skew ratings more toward average than warranted), and strictness (giving
ratings that are more negative than warranted; Robiner, Saltzman, Hober-
man, Semrud-Clikeman, et al., 1997). Robiner, Saltzman, Hoberman, Se-
mrud-Clikeman, et al.'s (1997) survey of 62 supervisors revealed that 58%
of the supervisors believed their evaluations were biased in some way, mainly
because of leniency or the central tendency.
198 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Ladany, Lehrman-Waterman, et al. (1999) found that supervisees cited
performance evaluation and monitoring of supervisees' activities as the most
frequent ethical violation. In a survey of counseling training sites, there was
high variability among programs in the type of evaluation and exit criteria.
Out of 60 counseling centers, only 1 had complete formal exit criteria (Hahn
& Molnar, 1991). In a survey of 179 APA-accredited internships, the most
frequently used procedures were informal qualitative procedures; quantitative
comparison procedures were used the least (Norcross et al., 1986). Forrest,
Elman, Gizara, and Vacha-Haase (1999) concluded,
Our review of the literature describing evaluation criteria used by aca-
demic and internship programs suggest minimal consensus across pro-
grams about evaluation criteria and procedures. There does not appear
to be a systematic and comprehensive evaluation schema that is widely
accepted within professional psychology training programs, (p. 641)
Ellis and Ladany (1997) also concluded that, although supervisees can
be evaluated effectively, currently "there is little evidence indicating how
or what is being evaluated" (p. 484). There is a significant gap between
what is ethically and programmatically indicated for evaluation and what
is actually practiced.
PSYCHOLOGIST AS EVALUATOR
Cormier and Bernard (1982) described three pivotal skills in the train-
ing of the psychologist to be an evaluator:
(a) the ability to evaluate efficiently using some objective criteria as a
yardstick or measure; (b) the ability to communicate feedback clearly
and to have some method of checking the counselor's understanding
of the feedback; (c) the ability to be comfortable and effective with
the power inherent in the role of supervisor, (p. 490)
These skills are basic competencies that all supervisors should possess.
In addition, Ellis and Ladany (1997) delineated the parameters for evaluating
supervisee competence. They suggested consideration of scope of compe-
tency, the particular domain and modality of therapy behavior, skills and
behaviors desired, a designated period of time, and the method of assessment.
TYPES OF EVALUATION
The following are some of the types of evaluation used in supervision:
• qualitative or quantitative evaluation of material presented by
the supervisee regarding the client and interactions between
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
199

the client and the supervisee—therapist, based on recollection
(described by Cone [2001] as indirect, because of the temporal
gap and lack of direct observation);
qualitative or quantitative evaluation of observational (live or
videotaped) data of interactions between the client or family
and the supervisee-therapist (described by Cone [2001] as direct
with no temporal gap), which may include responses to the
following variables or others that can be operationalized and
coded from the observed session or Likert scales developed to
assess the following:
• affective component,
• cultural and diversity competency,
• relationship and interpersonal skills,
• conceptualization,
• diagnosis,
• technical skills,
• adherence to the model, and
• empathy;
evaluation of the progress of the supervisee toward predesig-
nated therapy goals;
analysis of client-report outcome data on the client's progress;
use of rating scales for role induction or to structure forma-
tive feedback;
Use of unobtrusive measures, such as comparing tallies of client
attendance and cancellations, analyzing rates of client reten-
tion, and determining the number of clients seen per week
or psychodiagnostics sessions completed, assessing supervisee
timely and credible completion of paperwork;
analysis of client satisfaction data, based on client reports and
attendance records;
assessment of case presentations at grand rounds or diagnostic
team meetings;
analysis of portfolios or examinations (adapted from Sumerall
et al, 2000);
ratings of a work sample, including diagnostic assessment, case
formulation, and course of treatment (Dienst & Armstrong,
1988);
analysis of critical incidents (Norman, 1985) or incidents that
were major turning points in supervision, resulting in change
to the supervisee's approach or effectiveness;
study of diagnostic thinking, clinical judgment, or problem
solving in which physicians are observed and questioned as
they solve a clinical problem (Norman, 1985).
200 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

Frame and Stevens-Smith (1995) identified and operationalized partic-
ularly salient variables that can be converted to an evaluation format. They
identified nine characteristics to be imperative to counselor development,
compiled through analysis of counselor literature by the counseling psychol-
ogy department at the University of Colorado—Denver: openness, flexibility,
positivity, cooperativeness, willingness to use and accept feedback, awareness
of one's impact on others, ability to deal with conflict, ability to accept
personal responsibility, and ability to express feelings effectively and appro-
priately. On a 5-point Likert scale, a minimum rating of 3 points per item
is required.
Evaluation of the Process of Supervision
Evaluation of the process of supervision is another approach. The
measure by Worthen and Isakson (2000) shown in Appendix J provides for
supervisee introspection regarding multiple aspects of suitability, conceptual-
ization, relationship, technique, results, and satisfaction with supervision.
Although this approach has not been empirically validated, the authors
reported good reliability of data. It appears to be useful in providing struc-
tured, somewhat less judgmental feedback from supervisee to supervisor.
A Supervisory Utilization Rating Form (SURF) was developed by
Vespia et al. (2002). Although it has not been psychometrically supported,
they suggested its use as a tool in role induction, to help supervisees define
their task and what is entailed in being a supervisee. It might also be useful
in identifying differences between importance assigned to various supervisory
activities by supervisors and supervisees. For example, two items rated as
more important by supervisees than supervisors were "critiques own work"
and "invites feedback from supervisor" (Vespia et al., 2002, p. 60).
The observational instrument (Process Evaluation of Teaching and
Supervision) described by Milne and James (2002) provides another format
for assessment. By coding supervisee behaviors of reflecting, experimenting,
conceptualizing, experiencing, and planning in the context of supervisor
behaviors of managing, listening, supporting, informing and educating, and
guiding experiential learning, the authors provide a framework which could
be adapted to other assessment and guiding functions.
The Evaluation Process Within Supervision Inventory (see Appendix
I; Lehrman-Waterman & Ladany, 2001) is a self-report measure designed
to assess supervisees' perceptions of the degree of effectiveness of supervision
goal setting and feedback. Supervisees use a 7-point Likert scale, where 1 =
strongly disagree and 7 = strongly agree. The scale consists of two groupings
of items: goal setting and feedback. An example of a goal-setting item is,
"My supervisor and I created goals that were realistic." An example of a
feedback item is, "The feedback I received was directly related to the goals
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
201

we established" (Lehrman-Waterman & Ladany, 2001, p. 171). The authors
reported that the two scales were highly correlated, but conceptually distinct.
They accounted for the relatively lower internal consistency of the feedback
scale by explaining that feedback is very heterogeneous and includes input
solicited by a supervisor and whether summative evaluation was given. This
inventory appears useful in providing the supervisor with feedback on the
supervisee's perspective and satisfaction and as a springboard for discussion
of the supervision process.
Evaluating Client Outcome
Another type of supervision evaluation examines client-outcome data
on changes in the client's symptoms. There is not a complete correlation
between client outcome and competence of supervisees, as client's symptom
status is a significant factor, and assessment of this variable occurs informally
anyway (Ward, Friedlander, Schoen, &. Klein, 1985) and plays a role in
evaluation. Although client outcome is considered the acid test of supervi-
sion efficacy (Ellis & Ladany, 1997; Stein & Lambert, 1995), to date we
do not have clear, methodologically sound data on client outcome and its
relationship to supervision.
Several methodologies have been described to track client change
(Clement, 1999; Frazier, Dik, Glaser, Steward, & Tashiro, 2002; Lambert
et al., 2002) or to relate monitoring of client outcome to supervision (Lam-
bert & Hawkins, 2001, Worthen & Isakson, 2002). The Outcome Question-
naire, or OQ-45, a self-report measure, consists of three subscales: symptom
distress, interpersonal relations, and social role performance. A youth ver-
sion, the Youth Outcome Questionnaire (Y-OQ), is geared to clients ages 4
to 17 and contains six subscales: intrapersonal distress, somatics, interper-
sonal relations, critical items, social problems, and behavioral dysfunction
(Wells, Burlingame, Lambert, Hoag, & Hope, 1996). A noteworthy method-
ology combines the OQ-45 and, based on the results, a therapeutic-alliance
assessment (Horvath & Greenberg, 1994) or analysis of the client's motiva-
tion for change (McConnaughy, Prochaska, & Velicer, 1983) to determine
which factors are influencing inadequate client progress (Lambert &
Hawkins, 2001). Under this approach, the therapist is given a weekly graph
with white, green, yellow, and red dots signifying different degrees of the
client's self-reported functioning and the probability of achieving a positive
outcome. White corresponds to normal functioning indicative of a need for
termination of treatment, whereas green signifies adequate progress without
a need for treatment-plan changes. Yellow reflects less than adequate prog-
ress, a need for treatment-plan change, and consideration that treatment
is not helping. Finally, red signifies that the client is not progressing at an
202 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

expected level and may withdraw from treatment prematurely or end up
with a negative treatment effect. However, significant changes need to be
made to this methodology; for example, readiness for change could be
assessed (Lambert & Hawkins, 2001).
Lambert and Hawkins (2001) believed that the kinds of feedback
evinced by their approach are not systematically elicited in the supervisory
process and have been associated with client improvement in therapist-
client feedback studies (Lambert etal., 2001). In one case described by
Lambert and Hawkins (2001), after a series of very negative feedback reports
about the client's symptom severity, evidence of the need to rethink the
treatment plan, the client began to improve on self-reports, a change that
went unnoticed by the novice therapist. When questioned, the client de-
scribed that the extreme discomfort of the symptoms was unmanageable,
thereby increasing the client's motivation to improve.
Worthen and Isakson (2002) used Lambert's OQ-45 (Lambert & Bur-
lingame, 1996) to provide weekly client-outcome data. They posited client
feedback to be value neutral and easier for trainees to tolerate and incorpo-
rate. Lambert et al. (2002) found this feedback to enhance therapy outcome.
Although the results from the Worthen and Isakson (2002) study were
equivocal because of pretreatment between-group differences, this technique
may provide a way to incorporate client outcome into the supervisory process.
Frazier et al.'s (2002) application of Clement (1999) used scales with fixed
behavioral points for client self-monitoring, which could be used in supervi-
sion as well.
A somewhat different approach to evaluation is provided in the feminist
supervision model. Under this approach, the supervisor and the supervisee
each gives the other evaluative feedback both on an ongoing basis and in
written form on completion of the supervision. Responsibility is shared
for evaluating success and limitations in goal attainment (Zimmerman &
Haddock, 2001). However, it is clearly established that the supervisor must
provide direct and valid evaluations and feedback and if necessary, recom-
mend the supervisee's termination from the training program. All feedback
is provided in a humane manner (Porter &. Vasquez, 1997).
Evaluation of Manualized Treatment
Supervisors in manualized-treatment programs rate each supervisory
hour on how closely it adhered to the manual and to the parameters of
treatment. Attention is given to how well the supervisee completed the
stated goals of the session, individualized the session for the benefit of the
client, and stayed within the treatment protocol (Kendall & Southam-
Gerow, 1995). This type of tracking could be modified so that trainees and
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
203

supervisors rate these variables session by session. Henggeler and Scboenwald
(1998) developed a manual for supervision of multisystemic therapy, or
MST; their manual is one of the only efforts to create a supervisory model
to accompany a transportable evidence-based mental health treatment for
the community. Particularly interesting is the Supervisor Adherence
Measure (Henggeler et al., 2002), a questionnaire that articulates and as-
sesses multiple aspects of the supervisor's role in implementing the model.
This questionnaire is a noteworthy effort to organize the elements of super-
vision in a measurable format, to demystify the process, and to provide
a roadmap to evaluation of the supervision process within a particular
model.
Lambert and Ogles (1997) came to the following conclusions regarding
existing measures of training outcome: (a) Focusing on observable behavior
of trainees, with frequency counts, is most useful; (b) evaluation of training
through criteria from several sources is most desirable (i.e., from clients,
supervisor, and trainees themselves); (c) it is ideal to evaluate the effects
of supervision by looking at client-outcome and relationship (e.g., trainee-
client) variables, but this goal is aspirational; (d) most outcome measures
are "homemade" and lack reliability and validity, so we need to move toward
criterion measures instead.
FORMATIVE AND SUMMATIVE EVALUATION
Formative and summative evaluations are two types of evaluation in
the psychology traineeship, each of which may have a different emotional
valence (Robiner et al., 1993). Formative evaluation, which is seen as a
way to assist in skill refinement and identification of personal issues that
may be impeding clinical practice, is viewed more positively than summative
evaluation. Because psychologists believe in positive change and in the power
of feedback, formative evaluation may be syntonic. However, summative
evaluation, or the objective assessment of competence and performance, is
not viewed so positively. Because of the outcomes it yields (completion and
passing, probationary status, or termination), there is greater ambivalence
or negativity associated with this form of evaluation. There may be specific
reasons that either form of evaluation, but especially summative, is difficult.
To some supervisors, being an evaluator may feel like a dual role: On one
hand, the supervisor is supportive, personal, and growth focused, whereas
on the other hand he or she is the one to give hard facts on how the trainee
is not measuring up to the requirements of the traineeship. Other reasons
for supervisor discomfort with these forms of evaluation include unfamiliarity
with the process of evaluation, because of a lack of supervision evaluation
204 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

training (Borders & Leddick, 1988). In addition, there are all the afbremen'
tioned reasons that supervisors avoid or are lenient in evaluation.
Formative and Summative Feedback
Because of the structure of the supervisory relationship, the definition
of its parameters and expectations, its use as a vehicle and process for formal
feedback, etc., an early expectation should be established for a structure of
goals and for ongoing qualitative feedback. These elements should be dic-
tated by the goals of the trainee, the developmental level at which the
trainee is functioning, and attention to the evaluation form that will be
used for the summative evaluation. Supervisors must have competency in
providing formative and summative feedback to trainees.
There are multiple levels of evaluation within the larger categories of
formative and summative evaluation, including evaluative feedback, correc-
tive feedback, and general feedback. In particular, giving corrective feedback
to trainees is an essential part of supervision. When goals are clearly defined,
as in a training contract, and updated as appropriate, a skillful supervisor uses
the contract as the overarching framework for supervision. Thus, tangible
behavioral feedback can be linked to the training goals. In the case, for
example, of a trainee who continues to be content oriented as opposed to
process oriented, corrective feedback might include identification of the
shifts to content, analysis of the trainee's feeling state and thinking process
at these junctures when the transition to content occurs, and analysis of
alternative explanations of why the shifts occurred.
Ronnestad and Skovholt (1993) discriminated between confirmatory
feedback given to beginning trainees and corrective feedback given to more
advanced trainees. Summative evaluation takes the form of grades, ratings,
passing or failing the training sequence, and feedback to the school or
graduate institution. Formative feedback can take on many forms:
• Reflective:
• "I wonder how that felt to you.";
• "I wonder what you were thinking or feeling when. . .";
• reflection on the impact of a particular client on the
supervisee;
• observation of a behavior or event that was unnoticed in
the session;
• a general observation about the role of the therapist vis a vis
the clients.
• Integrative:
• "Let's think about that and how it fits in the direction in
which you see the family moving";
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
205

• "Where would pursuing that option have led?";
• "What was your thought process when you let that opportu-
nity pass?"
• Neutral: "It would be interesting to know. . .."
• Empowering:
• "Your skill set has markedly enlarged, and with it your integra-
tion of clinical material";
• "Your use of the metaphor far surpasses your self-assessment
of play-therapy competence";
• "Think about how well you approached the same problem
last month when the mother was so angry";
• "Remember how your research experience with anxiety pro-
vides you with a perspective on how to approach this
situation";
« "I am struck by the contrast between how self-effacing you
are in supervision and how effective you are with this family";
• "Your skillful use of the metaphor paved the way for the
child's disclosure about her level of pain."
• Analytic:
• "Let's analyze the pattern of what has been happening in the
past three sessions";
• "I'm wondering what your thought process would have been
if there were any other ways to have linked that situation to
the history of abuse."
• Responsive:
• "It seemed like you were wondering which way to proceed";
• "What emotions were elicited in you when your client accused
you of being unfeeling?"
• Corrective:
• "It would be interesting to see what prefaces besides disclaim-
ers you could use";
• "I am wondering what other ideas you and I can come up
with to get around the problem of the mother's continuing
to ignore the child's appropriate behavior."
• Level-I Concern—specification of concern and context: "I'm
concerned that the mother started to broach punishment and
you changed the subject. Why do you think that happened?"
(Assume, in this example, that there was a previous report of
child abuse, and thus it is critical to monitor the types of
punishment that are being used.)
• Level-II Concern: "The fact that you did not follow up with
the input about exploring possible child abuse in this case is a
legal breach as well as a breach of professionalism."
206 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

• Evaluative feedback:
• Positive:
• "You are responding much more clearly and empathically
to this family, a direction we indicated in your goals.
Good job";
• "Your intervention had the desired effect on the adolescent."
• Negative:
• "You are continuing to ignore affective expression of this
child. Attending to the child's affective expression is a
goal in your contract, and I am increasingly concerned
that the efforts we are making to improve this area are
not succeeding";
• "I am continuing to be concerned about how you do not
seem to be integrating the concept of process in your clinical
work. For your level of training and experience, I am very
surprised that you are not progressing more easily."
Supervisors need to develop their own individual styles of imparting
feedback. Some very seasoned supervisors prefer to give very positive feed-
back throughout most of the supervisory hour and, at most, one negative
or corrective piece of feedback toward the end, interwoven with state-
ments of the trainee's strengths. In a strength-based approach, it is essential
to be honest, as emphasis on strengths to the extent that areas needing
improvement are not mentioned is not an ethical, creditable, or educa-
tional approach.
PROCEDURE FOR COMPETENCY-BASED EVALUATION
The first step in the competency-based approach is to compile the
learning assessment, determining areas of strength and weakness within
each trainee's prior experience and academic training. Reviews of self-
reports, the elaborate internship or trainee application forms, and, in some
cases, descriptions from graduate training directors may be included in the
assessment. Hahn and Molnar (1991) suggested that evaluation of interns
actually begins during the internship application process, when training
committees review applicants, view their areas of strength and weakness,
and build a class or intern group out of the successful applicants. The next
step in the establishment of the evaluation process could be to obtain
postadmission direct input from training directors or professors of practicum,
internship, or fellowship programs on the supervisee's areas of strength and
weakness, perhaps through the use of a checklist or Likert-scaled items
geared to the specific focus and competencies of the training program that
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
207

the supervisee is entering. Early observations by the new supervisors and
supervisee self-reports of competencies are done to establish the format for
goals within a training contract. It may be useful to break down particular
tasks into component parts (for an example, see chap. 3, this volume)
and have the trainee complete a self-assessment on the incremental steps.
Alternatively, larger increments can be self-assessed, with confirmation pro-
vided from one or more supervisors on observing or supervising performance
in each area.
Supervision Contract
The written training contract, or working agreement (Proctor, 1997),
is a key to the establishment of the training relationship between trainee
and setting or supervisor. It is also an important part of ethical structuring,
relationship building, and evaluation. The contract can be described as an
"Individualized Learner Contract" (Cobia & Boes, 2000) and should be in
writing (Osborne & Davis, 1996). It should be initiated by the supervisor
(Sherry, 1991) prior to or at the very beginning of the training sequence
and signed by both supervisor and supervisee, with copies for both (Bridge
& Bascue, 1990). It should be brought to supervision regularly for
reference, as a review of the goals and expectations. The training contract
has a structural function analogous to the supervisory relationship per se
(Ronnestad & Skovholt, 1993). Besides satisfying due-process and informed-
consent rights of supervisees, the document contributes to the clear articula-
tion of goals and expectations, which should be frequently addressed and
reviewed. Such practices result in effective supervision (Leddick & Dye,
1987). The process of involving the trainee in formulating a working agree-
ment in the form of a contract may enhance the supervisee's sense of
responsibility for learning (Osborne & Davis, 1996) and perhaps the super-
visee's dominance.
Although we have proposed one sample supervision contract in
Appendix A, it is intended mainly to be an example. Multiple systems
can be generated as a function of theoretical orientation, incorporating
procedures such as manualized treatments, systems, and modalities (Shaw
& Dodson, 1988). It is important to note the significance of psychometrically
sound assessments of competencies with excellent interrater reliability as a
goal. We suggest that developmental gradients for metaphor, process, sense
of self, and relationship may be built into the evaluation process and serve
as competency anchors in the process of supervision and in evaluation.
There are multiple examples of competency-assessment programs available
at the APPIC Web site (http://www.appic.org), most of which are based
on an analysis of the components of the tasks that compose each respective
208 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

training program. Use of behaviorally anchored, specific categories with
ratings given by supervisors appears to be the norm. Some ratings are based
on observation, whereas others are based on responses to a vignette.
Goals and objectives should be mutually agreed up by the supervisor
and supervisee and should include a definition of'how progress toward the
goals will be evaluated, a statement of expected periods of time for the
accomplishment of the goals, and a list of responsibilities of supervisor and
supervisee if the goals are not met (Cobia & Boes, 2000). Cornerstones of
the contract are the developmental needs and strengths of the supervisee;
the competencies of the supervisor; the duties and responsibilities of both the
supervisor and supervisee; procedural considerations; opportunities provided
within the setting, including those afforded by unique characteristics of the
clients; and supervisory goals, methods, and foci (Ronnestad 6k Skovholt,
1993). Lehrman-Waterman & Ladany (2001) summarized their research
findings on desirable qualities of goals as including specificity, realistic qual-
ity, measurability, prioritization, and early definition. Within this context,
we may also include the amount and length of supervision, where and how
supervision is to be conducted, and the types of monitoring activities as
elements that should be articulated in the contract (Osborne & Davis,
1996).
Specifying available resources ensures clear communication regarding
realistic possibilities within a particular setting. For example, trainees would
do well to formulate goals that are compatible with the organization and
mission of the agency. Methods that need to be spelled out include procedures
such as for reviewing required videotapes, audiotapes, or live observations
or for supervisory interventions such as role-playing, midsession supervision
with feedback, didactics, or observation of a clinician or supervisor. Live
supervision serves as an ethical safeguard (Cormier & Bernard, 1982). The
functions of observation are to enhance compliance with a training model,
to refine supervisory communication, and to address process, transference,
and countertransference. Articulation of theoretical orientation in this con-
text is critical. For example, a critical issue may be determining whether
the supervisory relationship is conceptualized as a significant agent for change
(Ronnestad 6k Skovholt, 1993).
Clearly articulating the evaluation process is a critical component of
the supervisory contract (Osborne 6k Davis, 1996). Components of the
evaluation process include amount, type (e.g., formal vs. informal, or written
vs. verbal), timing, and frequency. In addition, the supervisory contract
should specify that a "primary role of the supervisor is that of evaluation"
(Osborne 6k Davis, 1996, p. 129). Also, methods by which information is
to be recorded (e.g., a formal evaluation format provided by the school or
by the setting, verbal feedback provided to the school, or a narrative in
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
209

letter form) should be specified, and the parties who will be receiving parts
of the evaluation and which parts they will be receiving should be identified
so that clear limits of confidentiality are established (Osborn & Davis, 1996).
A prototypical or standard contract with potential for individualization
provides a structure through which the needs of the trainee and of the
setting can be met. A program can be designed carefully by drawing on
areas of strength and areas that need improvement within the structure of
the clinical services and requirements of the setting. We advocate greater
rather than lesser specificity in requirements, all of which may be individual-
ized for the particular program.
Within the training contract are some quantitative-evaluation compo-
nents that constitute program requirements (e.g., productivity, number of
videos made, number of psychodiagnostic batteries completed, client diver-
sity, diagnoses, and family compositions served). A more qualitative evalua-
tion is based on aspects of performance (as enumerated by the evaluation
form).
Supervision Contract Prototypes
Osborn and Davis (1996) provided an outline for a supervision con-
tract, and Sutter, McPherson, and Geeseman (2002) provided a prototype
of a contract for supervision that includes multiple sections. In Sutter et al.'s
(2002) prototype, supervisee and supervisor agree to the length and purpose
of training, payment arrangements, malpractice insurance, and record-
keeping expectations. Supervisors agree to follow all ethical, legal, and office
codes and policies; to be available; to identify coverage for absences; to
document supervision; and to provide evaluation. Supervisees agree to docu-
ment supervised activities; follow all ethical, legal, and office codes and
policies; and inform clients of the supervisees' status as an unlicensed super-
visee under supervision. In contrast, Osborn and Davis (1996) described
the contract as consisting of purpose, goals, objectives, a context of services,
evaluation methods, the duties and responsibilities of both supervisor and
supervisee, procedural considerations (e.g., with respect to notes, taping, and
conflict resolution), and a definition of the supervisor's scope of competency.
The Sutter et al. (2002) contract addresses many structural, ethical, and
procedural aspects, but not the qualitative, individualized, or programmatic
factors relating to the growth and development of the trainee. Osborne
and Davis (1996) included more of the latter factors, but did not lay out
competencies or specific, individualized training goals. Ideally, a contract
would address all of these aspects. An example of a contract is given in
Appendix A. This contract is not intended to be exemplary, but simply to
serve as an example on which one can build.
210 
CLINICAL S UPERVISION

The level of specificity of the training contract is a critical area.
Ronnestad and Skovholt (1993) described the importance of balancing goals
generally enough to be meaningful, but specifically enough to allow their
assessment. They also highlighted the dangers of changing goals too fre-
quently and of maintaining goals too rigidly. In a model of "goal-directed
supervision plans" (Talen & Schindler, 1993), goals relating to conceptual
models, therapy skills, diagnosis and treatment planning, and personal and
professional issues were developed. It was noted that secondary benefit
of treatment-plan development included enhancement of the supervisory
relationship and facilitation of evaluation. Under this model, trainees defined
specific needs or problem areas; then, based on sample models of training
plans, objectives or goals for supervision were developed and supervisory
procedures and strategies were identified to assist in accomplishing the goals.
Some of the suggested supervision strategies included supervisory integration
of data (assessment and therapy process), expansion of trainees' alternative
responses, and use of case examples to amplify a particular intervention plan.
360-DEOREE FEEDBACK
A conclusion shared by many who have studied evaluation is that it
is highly desirable to use multiple sources of data (Fuqua, Newman, Scott,
& Gade, 1986; Lambert & Ogles, 1997). The greater the amount of inference
required, the lower is interrater reliability (Shaw & Dodson, 1988). At issue
are the finite quality of the behavior to be measured and determination of
the specific behaviors that comprise a particular outcome. If information is
not collected in a systematic way, these uncertainties and unreliabilities are
incorporated into the evaluation process of the student. Ideally, multiple
sources of input are used to assess the same dimension, such as the trainee's
development as a therapist. When looking at client outcomes, Cone (2001)
advocated measurement of multiple aspects of the client constructs, to gauge
their relative effectiveness.
Multirater feedback is commonplace in business, where ratings are
often obtained from a complete circle (360 degrees) of viewpoints, including
those of peers, managers, clients, and direct reports (Sala & Dwight, 2002).
There is evidence that such feedback is important in increasing self-
awareness of performance (J. R. Williams & Johnson, 2000). Self-monitoring
and self-rating are of questionable validity, because they have very low
correlations with others' perceptions. In contrast, peer, direct-report, and
managerial ratings correlate moderately (Sala & Dwight, 2002). J. R. Wil-
liams and Johnson (2000) found self-ratings to be higher (i.e., more lenient)
than ratings by supervisors. However, the high self-ratings in one study
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
211

were only in the domains of relationships with clients (e.g., understanding,
communication, and trust) and in problem-solving-oriented behaviors
(Church, 1997). Clients also rated more highly in these areas. And the
greater the agreement in these areas for a given observer group, the higher
were the overall performance ratings of that group, especially with respect
to creativity (Church, 1997). Researchers concluded that different types of
competencies might be best analyzed by different types of assessment; thus,
multirater surveys are most desirable (Church, 1997; Sala &. Dwight, 2002).
However, there is also evidence that the more individuals seek feed-
back, through inquiry about their comparative performance, by monitoring
or covertly comparing their own performance with that of others, and by
assessing how others respond to them, the more congruent self-ratings are to
supervisory ratings. Individuals who seek less feedback have less congruence
between self-ratings and supervisory ratings (J. R. Williams & Johnson,
2000). In fact, J. R. Williams and Johnson (2000) found monitoring to be
associated with higher congruence between self-ratings and supervisor rat-
ings. No such results were found for inquiry, and monitoring occurred more
frequently than inquiry. An association has been shown between managerial
self-awareness, vis-a-vis ratings agreement, and enhancement in managerial
performance (Church, 1997) and between self-monitoring and job-related
interpersonal effectiveness (Warech, Smither, Reilly, Millsap, & Reilly,
1998). A high convergence between 360-degree ratings and self-ratings is
conceptualized as self-awareness (Church, 1997). However, these results are
from supervisory relationships in business. While they should be considered
with caution, they provide an interesting entree into training-performance
analysis. Falender and Shafranske (2004) consider applications of 360-degree
feedback to psychology training.
RUBRICS
As an alternative, and in conjunction with the accreditation standards
of many programs, Hanna and Smith (1998) proposed development of a
rubric for performance assessment. A rubric is defined as a quantitative
method for assessment of students' performance targets in light of agreed-
on standards. Because of the need to evaluate performance, as well as
theoretical and technical skills, the rubric allows for assessment with specific
standards, anchors, and defined levels of performance for various training
levels. Hanna and Smith (1998) described the need to clearly describe each
dimension to be evaluated; in addition, a scale and very specific examples
of achievement at each level must be provided. In a sample scoring rubric,
they defined the competency of "establishing counseling relationship" and
assigned the highest rating, 5, to performance described as follows: "At least
212 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

97% of the time, makes a conscious effort to use the core conditions of
counseling: empathy, unconditional positive regard, genuineness, and
concreteness/intentionality" (Hanna &. Smith, 1998, p. 276). They assigned
the lowest rating, 1, to, performance described as, "has significant difficulty
exhibiting a knowledge of, or a use of (the same previously mentioned)
core conditions" (Hanna & Smith, 1998, p. 276). Advantages of rubrics are
that they can be individually tailored to reflect the particular competencies
of an individual program, can be scaled, and allow evaluation of inter-
rater reliability.
EVALUATION, SUPERVISORY RATINGS, AND
SUPERVISION SATISFACTION
There is some evidence that supervisees who rate their supervisory
experiences more highly are evaluated more highly by their supervisor (Ken-
nard et al., 1987). Factors such as strength of the emotional bond between
supervisor and supervisee may be indicative of whether supervisees like their
supervisors, as in Ladany, Ellis, et al.'s (1999) study, in which a relationship
was found between emotional bond, positive perceptions of supervisors'
personal qualities, and positive judgment of one's own behavior in supervi-
sion, all of which were associated with greater comfort in supervision. "Lik-
ing" one's supervisor may be related to the whole evaluative process and
may be even stronger if rating scales completed by supervisors are the
exclusive means of evaluating.
However, it may be that the most effective supervision is not the most
satisfying supervision (Ladany, Ellis, et al., 1999). In other words, supervisors
who give serious feedback may not be among a trainee's favorites, at least
at the time that the feedback is given. More research is needed on effective
feedback and how it relates to other variables of client outcome, supervisee
satisfaction, supervisee developmental level, and supervisee progress.
POTENTIAL FORMAL MODELS FOR COMPETENCY-BASED
SUMMATIVE EVALUATION
Individual, goal-centered evaluations may be developed for use by
supervisors and trainees in live or videotaped sessions. In a Microcounseling
paradigm, Daniels, Rigazio-Diglio, and Ivey (1997) outlined a process of
training that we believe has a built-in evaluation component that results
from the definition of baseline levels of functioning with predetermined
criteria levels. Training behaviors are shaped through development of a
common language and the use of modeling, self-observation, and copious
EVALUATION OF THE S UPERVISORY PROCESS 
213

feedback from the supervisor. A hierarchy of skills is a developmental se-
quence that the counselor needs to accrue, passing from the basic skill of
attending to the highest skill of individualizing a personal style and theory.
However, it has been pointed out that use of direct confrontation and self-
disclosure may be culturally dystonic (M. T. Brown & Landrum-Brown,
1995), causing discomfort that could be avoided by use of a less confronta-
tional, less demanding style until rapport is established.
EVALUATION OR LACK OF SUCH AS AN ETHICAL ISSUE
Ethical considerations, addressed more fully in chapter 7, this volume,
are critical for consideration in evaluation. It may be difficult for trainees,
who are dependent on their supervisors for evaluation, letters of recommen-
dation to their schools, and future employment, to be honest in feedback
regarding supervisor weaknesses or deficiencies. Although supervisees per-
ceive supervisory ethical lapses (Ladany, Lehrman-Waterman, et al., 1999),
counterproductive events in supervision (Gray et al., 2001), and conflict
(Moskowitz 6k Rupert, 1983), they may be reluctant to give feedback on
these issues. When collecting feedback on supervisory performance from
supervisees, the reports should therefore be viewed tentatively.
Evaluating supervisees ex post facto in areas not clearly defined from
the onset violates their due-process and informed-consent rights (Forrest
et al., 1999). For example, intrapersonal functioning is a frequently cited
area of supervisee difficulty; however, almost half of the programs in one
survey did not routinely evaluate in that area (Olkin & Gaughen, 1991),
nor is it likely that most programs indicate their intention to do so. An
exception is the Professional Counseling Performance Evaluation, which
includes such areas as maturity, competence, and integrity and has items
on self-control, honesty, fairness, and respect (Kerl, Garcia, McCullough,
& Maxwell, 2002). Effectiveness of an individual in the role of supervisee
is an area often only implicitly evaluated (Vespia et al., 2002). Supervisees
are frequently unclear as to whether their supervisors discuss the supervisory
relationship or simply solicit supervisee feedback (Kurpius et al., 1991).
McCarthy et al. (1994) found that 48% of their sample said that the
supervisor—supervisee relationship was rarely discussed; 27% said it was
never discussed.
ADMISSION CRITERIA
Whether there should be requisite fitness or character-trait require-
ments for admission to psychology training and licensure programs is contro-
214 
CLINICAL 
SUPERVISION

versial. In contrasting psychology's stance with admission to the bar, which
has requirements of good moral character and fitness, Johnson and Campbell
(2002) stated that there is no mention of such character or fitness require-
ment in psychology accreditation guidelines (American Psychological Asso-
ciation, 2002e), nor do programs interview specifically for those domains.
They urged that fitness requirements be developed and proposed inclusion
of psychological stability, integrity, personality adjustment, responsible use
of substances, prudence, and caring as additional requirements.
REMEDIATION
As mentioned at the beginning of this chapter, evaluation may precipi-
tate a process of remediation; in a very small number of extreme problem
cases, evaluation precipitates due-process steps leading up to dismissal. Much
of the literature refers to such students as "impaired." However, it is better
to use a different identifier, so as to distinguish such supervisees from designa-
tion in the Americans With Disabilities Act (ADA) categorizations of
"impairment." ADA impairment refers to "any mental or psychological
disorder such as mental retardation, organic brain syndrome, emotional or
mental illness, and specific learning disabilities." Disability is defined as "a
physical or mental impairment that substantially limits one or more of the
major life activities of an individual" (Americans With Disabilities Act of
1990, 42 U.S.C. §12102(2)(A)), has a record of such, or is regarded as
having such an impairment (U.S. EEOC, 1992, p. 1-3; Bruyere, 2002).
In this book, we use the designation "trainee with problematic behav-
ior" to describe trainees who are not meeting set performance criteria. If a
trainee meets criteria for disability under the ADA, reasonable accommoda-
tions are required. However, "[e]ven when an applicant/intern/postdoc
claims he/she is a qualified disabled person, entitled to protection under the
Rehabilitation Act or ADA, the internship/program site has no obligation
to do so, unless the applicant/intern/postdoc also shows he/she can perform
the essential functions of his/her position, with or without reasonable accom-
modation" (Mitnick, 2002).
TRAINEE WITH PROBLEMATIC BEHAVIOR
Identification of problematic qualities is a major training issue. First,
there is the problem of lack of congruence between a program's established
evaluation criteria and processes for identifying problematic aspects of stu-
dents' behavior (Forrest et al., 1999). In addition, definition of "problematic"
varies from program to program and even within the same setting, depending
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
215

on the criteria used (Forrest et al., 1999). Harm and Molnar (1991) found
that "evaluation procedure at 8 of 33 institutions (surveyed) had failed at
the most gross level—that of distinguishing the unacceptable candidates
for graduation from the acceptable ones" (p. 415).
Overholser and Fine (1990) distinguish types of professional incompe-
tence due to lack of knowledge, inadequate clinical skills, deficient technical
skills, poor judgment, and disturbing interpersonal attributes.
Lamb et al. (1991) defined impairment (what we refer to as "problem-
atic behavior") in a training context as
[a]n interference in professional functioning that is reflected in one or
more of the following ways: (a) an inability or unwillingness to acquire
and integrate professional standards into one's repertoire of professional
behavior; (b) an inability to acquire professional skills to reach an
acceptable level of competency; (c) an inability to control personal
stress, psychological dysfunction and/or excessive emotional reactions
that may affect professional functioning, (pp. 291-292)
They defined unethical behavior on the part of supervisees and impairment
(or a problematic quality) as overlapping concepts: "All unethical behaviors
are a reflection of impairment, whereas impairment may involve other
aspects of professional behavior that may or may not eventuate in unethical
behavior" (p. 292). However, these authors pointed out the importance of
ensuring that the program itself abides by ethical practices, such as providing
training on the topics covered on the evaluation, ensuring due process, and
using timely evaluation procedures (Lamb et al., 1991).
In the controversy over definitions of incompetent, problematic, and
unethical, Forrest et al. (1999) concluded that an all-encompassing, broad
definition of the student with problematic performance is difficult "because
some unethical and incompetent professional behavior may not be the result
of diminished professional functioning but rather an inability to reach a
minimal acceptable standard of professional functioning" (p. 632). Thus,
they concluded that a subset of individuals considered as problematic may
never have met acceptable clinical or ethical standards of practice, but this
condition was not identified during their training.
Competent and problematic trainees were further differentiated by
Lamb et al. (1986):
(a) The [problematic] intern does not acknowledge, understand, or
address the problem when it is identified, (b) the problem is not merely
a reflection of a skill deficit that can be rectified by academic or didactic
training, (c) the quality of services delivered by the intern is consistently
negatively affected, (d) the problem is not restricted to one area of
professional functioning, (e) a disproportionate amount of attention by
training personnel is required, and/or (f) the intern's behavior does not
216 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

change as a function of feedback, remediation efforts, and/or time,
(p. 599)
Even with intensive remediation efforts, change is not observed.
The number of trainees with problematic behavior annually ranges
from 3.3% (Olkin & Gaughen, 1991; 54% return rate) to 4.2% or 4.8%,
and 66% of programs reported at least one such intern in the past 5 years
(Boxley, Drew, & Rangel, 1986 [29% return rate]; Forrest et al, 1999).
Areas that may lead to remediation include ethical violation, psychopathol-
ogy, poor academic performance, inadequate therapy (clinical) skills, inade-
quate assessment skills, poor clinical judgment, poor interpersonal skills,
problematic response to supervision, poor theoretical skills, and immaturity
(Biaggio, Gasparikova-Krasnec, & Bauer, 1983; Forrest et al., 1999; Olkin
& Gaughen, 1991). Procidano et al. (1995) found that 89% of departments
in graduate programs reported at least one instance of nonacademic, profes-
sional deficiency in the past 5 years with, the majority of failings being
limited clinical skills and personality or emotional problems.
In Mearns and Allen's (1991) investigation of difficulties that graduate
students experience having to deal with peers' problematic behavior (re-
sponse rate 30% for students and 18% for faculty), 95% of psychology
graduate student respondents reported having been aware of some serious
problematic qualities in a peer that interfered with professional functioning.
Faculty underestimated how many graduate students confronted their peers
and the intensity of student emotional response (e.g., worry, sorrow, or
guilt) and overestimated how many students did nothing about the problems.
In fact, many problematic trainees come to faculty attention through peer
report or community field placement or internship-site supervisors, especially
when the problems are in the area of intra- or interpersonal functioning
(Olkin & Gaughen, 1991).
The immediate concerns with trainee problematic behavior are the
potential for harm to clients (Frame & Stevens-Smith, 1995) and to the
public and the potential for violation of the ethical standard of nonmaleft-
cence. There is concern that in states which have abolished their oral exam,
one level of screening has been removed, placing greater onus on supervisors
in practicum, internship, and post-doctoral programs to identify trainees
who exhibit problematic behavior.
The percentage of practicing psychologists with significant problem-
atic issues is estimated to be 15 to 27%, with 7-14% not seeking help
(Wood, Klein, Cross, Lammers, & Elliott, 1985). Problematic behavior
includes mental illness, sexual misconduct, burnout, substance abuse, and
offenses resulting in license revocation (Laliotis & Grayson, 1985).
Personal-relationship problems and work with particularly difficult clients
may also result in stress and problematic qualities (Sherman & Thelen,
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
217

1998). Problematic psychologists should be distinguished from incompetent
(Kutz, 1986) and unethical (Stadler, Willing, Eberhage, & Ward, 1988)
professionals. Koocher and Keith-Spiegel (1998) estimated that almost half
of the psychologists who have had complaints filed against them appear to
have a personal problem that contributed to the alleged ethical violation.
A very small percentage of Wood et al.'s (1985) sample had reported
someone they perceived as a problematic colleague to a regulatory agency.
It is unknown how many individuals approach their colleagues regarding
perceived areas of distress or problems. It is noteworthy that the new APA
ethics code (American Psychological Association, 2002a) does not contain
section 1.13(b) of the 1992 code: "obligation to be alert to signs of, and
obtain assistance for, their personal problems at an early stage" (Lamb,
personal communication, 2002). The number of problematic psychologists
who are supervisors is unknown.
Dismissal
The process leading to dismissal is variable. Biaggio et al. (1983) found
that a large number of programs did not have procedures for dismissing
clinical students. Boxley et al. (1986) reported that 44% of internship pro-
grams that responded to their survey (29% response rate) had no formal due-
process procedures for trainees to be dismissed and no proactive approach.
Another 10% of the respondents felt no need to establish such procedures.
Sixty-six percent of the responding internships had no means of ensuring
due process to the interns who were to be dismissed. However, Procidano
et al. (1995; 32% return rate) reported that 74% of all graduate programs
had a policy for responding to students' professional deficiencies. There was
a relationship between having such a policy and reporting instances of such
deficiencies, indicating either that the policies arose as a result of the
deficiencies or that the policy facilitated their identification.
It is important to caution supervisors to focus solely on specifically
describing inadequate performance or behavior rather than looking for ex-
planatory factors. It is also important for supervisors to be aware of legal
precedent in the dismissal process. Dismissed students may file suits for
violation of due-process protection under the 14th Amendment of the U.S.
Constitution or under provisions of other employment laws. Procedures used
by supervisors may not be arbitrary, capricious, prejudicial, or discriminatory
(Knoff & Prout, 1985).
Dismissal rates vary. The percentages of programs reporting at least
one student being terminated have ranged from 52% (Vacha-Haase, 1995,
as reported by Forrest et al., 1999) to 86% (Biaggio et al., 1983). Within
the preceding 3 to 5 years, a mean of one student was reported to have been
terminated from a selected number of APA-approved counseling-psychology
218 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

programs (Gallessich & Olmstead, 1987, response rate 67%). According to
a survey by Tedesco (1982), 51 out of 3,325 interns in APA-approved
programs (63% response rate) failed to complete the training, and 89 others
were considered for premature termination but did not proceed. Twenty-
four interns left by their own choice, and 27 were asked to leave. Criteria
for termination were unsatisfactory academic performance, lack of timely
progress, failure of a course or practicum, unethical behavior, lack of inter-
personal maturity, or unsatisfactory clinical performance or judgment
(Biaggio et al., 1983; Gallessich & Olmstead, 1987). Tedesco's (1982) most
frequent reasons were emotional instability and manifestation of a personal-
ity disorder.
Several judicial precedents provide guidance regarding dismissal crite-
ria. Professionally related interpersonal skills are viewed to be within the
academic domain (Greenhill v. Baiky, 1975, cited in Knoff & Prout, 1985),
and remedial measures are within the domain of a program's faculty if they
are relevant to identified areas of deficit (Shuffer 
v. Trustees of California
State University and Colleges, 1977, cited in Knoff & Prout, 1985). In the
Supreme Court decision Board of Curators of the University of Missouri v.
Horowitz (1978), dismissal of a medical student for deficient clinical perfor-
mance, peer and patient relationships, and personal hygiene was upheld.
The court ruled that all rights under the 14th Amendment were sufficiently
protected (Knoff & Prout, 1985). In another case, Alanis v. University of
Texas Health Sciences Center (1992), unsuitability to practice medicine was
deemed an academic reason to be dismissed from medical school (Kerl et al.,
2002). The court appears to defer to schools in academic evaluation, with
appropriate due process following standard academic norms (Kerl et al.,
2002).
Responding to Trainee Problematic Behavior
Lamb et al. (1991) discussed a four-step model for responding to trainee
problematic behavior. In Step 1, which occurs early in the evaluation pro-
cess, supervisors who have identified problematic areas in trainee functioning
consult to clarify their concerns. Consultations, modifications in the trainee's
program, and the concerns themselves must be documented in keeping with
the due-process procedure, giving the trainee ample chance to remediate
the deficiencies and provide a formal reply.
If the measures in Step 1 do not result in performance improvement,
additional documentation and discussion of problematic behaviors ensue,
constituting Step 2. The training staff implements a full range of interven-
tions and observes the impact. Modifications are made to the supervision
procedure itself, and further elements of supervision and other interventions
are added as deemed necessary. We add the institution of a remediation
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
219

plan in Step 1 or, at the latest, Step 2, with specific timelines and clearly
articulated performance expectations. We also advocate notification of the
trainee's school at this point.
If further intervention is required, Step 3, or expulsion from the pro-
gram, is considered. If probation is necessary, the intern is notified in writing.
This information is shared with the academic institution as well; in general,
feedback is shared with the institution and the trainee throughout the entire
process. Due-process steps are followed, including the appeal-process steps
if the trainee chooses to appeal. Should expulsion occur, the school and
the trainee are simultaneously notified, and a process and time for departure
are planned.
In Step 4, the impact of the probation or expulsion is addressed sensi-
tively with all the remaining trainees, staff members, the academic program,
and the trainee him- or herself.
PROBLEMATIC SUPERVISORS
Supervisors may also be unable to perform their functions, perhaps
because of personal or external factors. Like discussion of trainees with
problematic behavior, discussion of problematic supervisors contains the
guiding assumption that the individual was previously functioning at a
higher level of competence, as discussed by Forrest et al. (1999). Muratori
(2001) proposed a continuum of ineffective supervisors from those who may
be improved through guided supervision to those who are frankly problematic
in one of the areas previously articulated for trainees. Muratori (2001)
suggested that the danger factor is grave for trainees with problematic super-
visors, because of the power differential and the fact that the supervisees
may be trapped in the supervisory relationship, with no options. We suggest
that, because this topic is such a new area of discussion, the supervisee
working with a problematic supervisor carries a greater burden than the
supervisor working with a problematic supervisee, as there typically are no
established procedures or guidelines to follow in the former case and because
of the power differential.
PREVENTION OF PROBLEMATIC BEHAVIOR
Coster and Schwebel (1997) proposed ways for psychologists who
believe they are experiencing symptoms of difficulty to proceed. These
methods should also be useful in the longer range prevention of problematic
symptoms in supervisees and supervisors. The suggested interventions in-
220 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

elude interpersonal support from people such as peers, spouse, companions,
family, and friends and intrapersonal activities such as self-awareness moni-
toring. The latter might include reduction of workload, increase of leisure
activities, increase of sleep, and heightening of awareness of the professional
life cycle. Other interventions are professional and civic activity and activism
and self-care, including forms of professional involvement. Coster and
Schwebel (1997) posed a series of questions for psychologists who have
identified themselves as being at risk of or on the road to severely problematic
behavior. These questions elicit responses about the progression from rigor-
ous self-awareness or metacognitive skills to assistance by peers and consulta-
tion with a therapist (Coster & Schwebel, 1997). It is essential that supervis-
ees receive training to ensure proactive awareness, prevention, and self-
monitoring of dysfunction. Guy and Norcross (1998) provide an excellent
self-care checklist.
Lamb (1999) suggested that more effective identification and negotia-
tion of professional boundary dilemmas in the training setting would serve
as a preventative strategy in some instances of problematic behavior. These
approaches would include a comprehensive orientation, with social net-
working, bonding opportunities, and general provision of a supportive
environment; distribution of specific written guidelines about performance
expectations and their relationship to problematic behavior; provision of
open avenues for challenging evaluations or dealing with boundary issues;
seminars on self-help and stressors, including means of dealing with the
stressors; guidelines for addressing boundary dilemmas; and opportunities to
identify and address boundary issues through role-playing or other means.
Slimp and Burian (1994) outlined steps that could be taken to prevent
ethical violations. They suggested that organizations establish an internal
ethics committee comprising both interns and staff. They also urged either
having an ethics consultant who is unaffiliated with the program, using the
local or APA ethics committee, or establishing policies and procedures that
address how to consult the ethics committee and for what reasons it may
be consulted, procedures for remediation and sanctions, guidelines that
address whether recommendations of the committee are binding, and
methods by which formal actions would follow.
REMEDIATION
The Association for Counselor Education and Supervision (1995)
provided a guideline regarding remediation:
2.12. Supervisors, through ongoing supervisee assessment and evalua-
tion, should be aware of any personal or professional limitations of
supervisees which are likely to impede future professional performance.
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
221

Supervisors have the responsibility of recommending remedial assistance
to the supervisee and of screening from the training program, applied
counseling setting, or state licensure those supervisees who are unable
to provide competent professional services. These recommendations
should be clearly and professionally explained in writing to the super-
visees who are so evaluated.
Olkin and Gaughen (1991) strongly recommended that reactivity be
replaced with proactivity in dealing with problem students. Ideally, this task
includes establishing, at the onset of training, clear contracts with supervisees
about policies and expectation, articulation and operationalization of ex-
pected behaviors, and routine evaluation and feedback on the articulated
requirements.
It has been suggested that the training years are prime for identification
and amelioration of problems. Psychologists believe strongly in remediation.
Behaviors become problematic only when not addressed and when they
persist in severity (Vasquez, 1988). Through monitoring and evaluation,
case-load modifications, intensive interventions such as live observation,
cotherapy with the supervisor, required supplemental courses, and leaves of
absence (Lamb et al., 1987), some remediation can occur. Goal setting and
provision of more frequent feedback are steps that could be instituted to
enhance the working alliance (Lehrman-Waterman & Ladany, 2001). Per-
sonal therapy and additional clinical field experiences are other options
(Knoff & Prout, 1985). However, although repeating coursework and per-
sonal therapy are the frequent forms of remediation, Olkin and Gaughen
(1991) cautioned that therapy goals and timelines may be unclear or undesig-
nated, and the program does not set them. Instead, the student and his or
her therapist do. Furthermore, because of confidentiality, the program will
not be privy to the trainee's progress or lack of such.
It is not clear that therapy is the remediation of choice for academic
or clinical functioning problems (Olkin & Gaughen, 1991). In the case of
remediating trainee sexual misconduct, Layman and McNamara (1997)
expressed concern that the low rates of sexually offending trainees preclude
the real possibility of a significant impact of early identification and interven-
tion during the training years. Conditions such as alcoholism might be
more evident during internship, as a retrospective analysis revealed that
psychologists in recovery reported they had exhibited harmful effects from
drinking as early as age twenty-four (Skorina, Bissell, & DeSoto, 1990),
which would in many cases be during graduate training.
Training programs must establish specific steps to remediate trainee
problematic functioning. Risk factors are implicit in the internship year
(Kaslow & Rice, 1985; Lamb et al., 1987; Lipovsky, 1988). Directors and
222 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

supervisors in internship programs know that the cycle of the training year
is fraught with peril regarding intern stress, potential for burnout or fatigue,
and general vulnerability (Lamb et al., 1982). Besides the due-process steps
and action plans with timelines, supportive relationships with training
staff, and monitoring of progress, a strength-based orientation with an
emphasis on small increments of improvement is indicated. It is also note-
worthy that there may be differences in perception between trainees and
supervisors as far as the degree of supportiveness of the training environment,
with faculty perceiving the training environment to be highly supportive
and supervisees feeling unsupported. This possibility warrants further
exploration.
Wise, Lowery, and Silverglade (1989) described remediation methods
that focus on skill development, workshops, supervision groups, consultation,
and continuing-education experiences. However, if there is still a need to
deal with specific issues or if skill development is blocked by personal issues,
they urged suggesting personal counseling. They identified the periods of
time before seeing clients and when the individual's identity as a therapist
has been partially established and he or she is gaining greater insight as
optimal times for referral.
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISOR
Providing feedback to the supervisor regarding his or her performance
should be an integral part of the evaluation process. In fact, Sherry (1991)
proposed that, as part of supervisory competence assessment, all supervisees
should evaluate their supervision and provide feedback to supervisors, prog-
ress toward supervisory contract goals should be reviewed regularly, and
supervision of supervisors should be provided. In addition, supervisors should
self-assess, taking into account success, failures, and areas in which they
feel they could improve or grow. However, any type of evaluation of the
supervisor has been relatively neglected in the literature (Dendinger &
Kohn, 1989). Logically, it appears that tnultisource evaluations are indicated,
including self-evaluations and evaluations by the supervisor of the supervisor,
fellow supervisors, supervisees, and individuals outside the agency who can
give an expert assessment of the supervisor's skill base (Dendinger & Kohn,
1989). (It has been suggested that supervisors be evaluated by supervisees
on relationship, agreement levels, knowledge, and communication and that
administrators might evaluate productivity, error rate, and complaints [as
reported by Dendinger & Kohn, 1989]). There are a number of evaluation
instruments for this purpose, including "Supervision Satisfaction Question-
naire" (Ladany, Hill, Corbett, & Nutt, 1996), "Supervisee Perceptions of
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
223

Supervision" (Oik & Friedlander, 1992), and "Supervisee/Trainee Self As-
sessment of Supervision-Related Knowledge and Skills" (Borders & Leddick,
1987). The Ladany, Hill, Corbett, and Nutt (1996) form addresses overall
satisfaction without eliciting specific feedback about areas where less satisfac-
tion is indicated. The Oik and Friedlander (1992) form found in Appendix H
combines supervisees' perceptions of supervision with assessments of the
level of uncertainty elicited. The best form for gathering feedback specific
to particular tasks is that provided by Borders and Leddick (1987; see
Appendix G), which breaks down items into teaching, counseling, consulta-
tion, and research-skills components. Another form, developed by Hall-
Marley (personal communication; and modified by Falender in Appendix L),
is linked to overall expectations for supervisee competencies. Another mea-
sure developed by Hall-Marley (personal communication; see Appendix K)
gathers supervisor feedback that can be organized to coordinate with program
goals and the training contract.
Herrmann (1996) developed a three-part format for evaluation of
supervisors in medical education. In the first part, a critical-incident ap-
proach is used to determine the number of hours the supervisee had spent
per week with the supervisor, the number of live or taped interviews with
the supervisor in the past six months, and the number of times detailed
feedback about progress was received. In the second section, residents rate
supervisors on enthusiasm, organization, clarity, knowledge, clinical supervi-
sion skills, availability, and modeling ability, with descriptive factors listed
to guide the rating (e.g., factors on role modeling; regular feedback and
constructive criticism; and sensitivity to gender, ethical, cultural, and SES
[socio-economic status] issues). Residents assign an overall rating to the
supervisor, using a 5-point Likert scale with a range from poor to excellent.
Finally, in the third part, residents have a chance to provide narrative
comments on the supervisor's strengths, major weaknesses, and possible
areas of improvement of supervision quality. Herrmann (1996) found that
having residents return the forms to the program office, with a cover sheet
identifying the resident (which was removed and destroyed once the form
was checked in), as a requirement for completion of the rotation dramatically
increased the number of evaluations returned. The large size of the training
program allowed anonymity. Generally, very positive outcomes resulted from
feedback given to supervisors. In another format adopted by Ramsbottom-
Lucier, Gillmore, Irby, and Ramsey (1994), residents evaluated their clinical
supervisors on knowledge and analytic ability, accessibility, establishment
of rapport, organization and clarity, enthusiasm, involvement of learner,
feedback and direction, and demonstration of clinical skills, using a 6-point
Likert scale. Residents also rated their perceived degree of involvement with
their supervisors on a 4-point scale. Reliability scores were high, especially
in outpatient settings.
224 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION
