PROGRAM EVALUATION
Although it would seem to be a high-priority area, little attention is
devoted to program evaluation outside of the self-study that evaluates self-
imposed criteria. Norcross and Stevenson (1984) found that the major factors
used by training directors of doctoral programs to evaluate the programs were
the quality of internships the students attained and feedback from internship
supervisors. Another important measure was quantitative evaluation of su-
pervisors by supervisees. Some efforts have been made to compare groups
of trainees under different conditions of training (Aronson, Akamatsu, &
Page, 1982) and to monitor acquisition of particular skills deemed requisite
to psychology training (e.g., empathy). Methodological issues such as the
need for more sophisticated instruments possibly beyond paper and pencil,
context-specific issues, and assessment of impact on client outcome have
been raised as future directions for program evaluation.
SUMMARY
In conclusion, the area of evaluation is central to the training of
psychologists. As Robiner, Saltzman, Hoberman, Semrud-Clikeman, et al.
(1997) summarized,
Evaluation requires judgments about supervisees' capability for exercis-
ing appropriate clinical judgment and their level of clinical proficiency.
Administrative determinations of supervisees' ability to proceed to more
advanced stages of training and ultimately to achieve autonomy in
clinical activities are based on supervisory evaluations, (p. 50)
The competencies necessary to do a creditable job entail the ability
to create self-assessments, performance assessments, and competency-based
evaluations and to provide formative and summative evaluation. A number
of tools have been cited that pave the way for more comprehensive forma-
tive evaluation and feedback. A competent supervisor must weave evalua-
tion considerations, feedback, and formal evaluation into the supervisory
relationship.
Competencies
The competencies in the area of evaluation of the supervisory process are as
follows:
• Ability to administer a format for assessment of incoming supervisees, to
identify their strengths and areas that need improvement, as well as a plan for
their development during the training period
EVALUATION OF THE SUPERVISORY PROCESS 
225

Ability to construct a supervision contract
Ability to construct tools to assess the supervisee's performance and behavior
during the training sequence
Skill at self-assessment for oneself and for administering self-assessment
measures for the supervisee
Skill at providing formative and summative feedback on an ongoing basis
Skill at eliciting feedback about oneself from supervisees and using this
feedback
226 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

9
THE EVOLVING PRACTICE OF
CLINICAL SUPERVISION
Our study of supervision leads to the conclusion that the landscape
of supervision is changing. We have been impressed by the range of compe-
tencies that are required to provide quality supervision. These competencies
include not only the knowledge and skills of a clinician, educator, supervisor,
and consultant, but also a host of personal and interpersonal qualities. The
requisite competencies to perform supervision will continue to evolve in step
with developments in professional psychology, the needs of an increasingly
diverse populace, continuing changes in the nature of service delivery, and
the requirements of accountability in assessing the competence of supervisees
and outcomes of their clients. Supervision is at the center of these
developments.
Our intent is to distinguish supervision from clinical practice and to
elevate its status as a unique specialty, which requires education and training,
and receives adequate administrative support. Supervision is a distinct spe-
cialty area and deserves recognition as such. It is our hope that our work
will contribute to the legitimatization of the field of supervision and increase
interest in competency articulation and development through the introduc-
tion of an appropriate methodology.
This volume has intended to provide a conceptual, research-based, and
scholarly foundation on which to consider advances in the practice of clinical
supervision. We have made recommendations and provided conceptual and
227

assessment tools to assist in putting these ideas to work. We have placed
an emphasis on the integration of theory and practice, with attention to
evaluation at all steps in the process. Integrity-in-relationship, ethical values-
based practice, appreciation for diversity, and science-informed practice were
identified as superordinate values, informing the practice of both psycho-
therapy and supervision. We have also advocated the use of a competency-
based approach to supervision, because such an educational model
complements the goals of supervision and readily supports empirical study.
With increased understanding of the supervisory process, the ideas and
approaches presented may be applied in the local clinical supervisory setting.
Programs of development require tailoring to the specific needs and unique
characteristics of a particular training clinic, hospital, agency, program, or
university. Initiatives to improve supervisory practice require commitment
at each level in the system—i.e., institution, clinical faculty, and individual
supervisor—to support program development. Such initiatives taken at the
individual or institutional level reflect professional values and commitment
to competent supervision practice.
IMMEDIATE OPPORTUNITIES AND CHALLENGES
Opportunities and challenges exist no matter how high the present
quality of clinical training and supervision provided. In keeping with the
understanding that competence, by definition, can always be enhanced,
individual supervisors and their institutions have an opportunity, as well as
a responsibility, for continuous improvement in quality (Nelson, Batalden,
& Ryer, 1998). In addition to the ongoing development of competence as
individuals (described in chap. 3, this volume), in diversity (described in
chap. 6, this volume), and in ethics and legal applications (described in
chap. 7, this volume), training institutions can initiate programs, tailored
to their unique local situation, to systematically enhance supervisor compe-
tence. Practice improvement models (PIMs) that have been developed to
improve the quality of clinical practice and influence clinician behavior
may be appropriated to enhance supervision competencies.
Cape and Barkham (2002) identified the following methods for improv-
ing clinical practice: training workshops, clinical supervision, clinical guide-
lines, evidence-based clinical methods, practice-based methods, clinical
audit, outcomes monitoring and management, outcomes benchmarking,
and continuous quality improvement (pp. 285-286). Of these approaches,
training workshops, supervision of clinical supervision, supervision guide-
lines, practice-based methods, and outcomes monitoring offer particularly
useful strategies in the enhancement of the practices of clinical supervision
228 
CLINICAL SUPERVISION

at the local level. Workshops and in-service training seminars, particularly
those that use experiential rather than just didactic methods, offer straight-
forward approaches to training and professional development. Ongoing peer
supervision and review, as per APA's Ethical Guidelines for Clinical Supervi-
sors (Association for Counselor Education and Supervision, 1995), provide
a means for formative feedback and offer learning opportunities for each of
the participants. Provision of ongoing supervision and support for all levels
of supervisors is an intervention that will strengthen practice. Supervision
guidelines such as those presented in this text provide tools to orient the
process to particularly salient content areas in supervision, such as cultural
or diversity competency (American Psychological Association, 1993a, 2000,
2002b). Clinical guidelines offer the advantage of simplicity and, when well
developed, "focus attention on areas of agreement about appropriate practice,
whether based on research evidence or consensus" (Cape & Barkham,
2002, p. 291).
Practice-based methods are focused directly on the practices of the clini-
cian or, in this case, the supervisor. The implementation of supervisor self-
report measures in conjunction with supervision guidelines and objective
analysis of supervisor behavior, as illustrated in Milne and James's (2002)
competency-based model of supervision (see chap. 1, this volume), as well as
elaborate self-assessment (see chap. 3, this volume; Belar et al., 2001) provide
tools to improve supervisor behaviors. Monitoring and management directly
relate to the assessment of supervisory outcomes. Presently, most assessment
procedures rely on supervisee self-reports of competence and satisfaction
with supervision, which do not actually measure outcomes in either client
progress or the development of clinical competencies. Assessments of out-
come can be conducted by observing skills demonstrated in therapy sessions
and through client response measures (Lambert & Hawkins, 2001).
Benchmarks can also be used to assess competence. Levels of compe-
tence can be operationalized and specific benchmarks of behavior defined.
Supervisor effectiveness can then be evaluated, in part, by the benchmarks
achieved by the supervisee during the course of training. Such a method
complements the competency-based approach to supervision, in which spe-
cific components of competency are identified, training goals are defined,
and procedures for assessing performance objectives are established. It is
anticipated that that the use of multiple PIMs is more likely to affect
supervisor behavior and supervisee and patient outcomes than the use of a
singular intervention strategy. We advocate that individuals and programs
self-assess their competence at supervision in general and in each of the
prescribed areas (e.g., personal factors, diversity, ethics and legal, and eval-
uation) and begin to build on existing structures to enhance program
functioning.
EVOLVING PRACTICE 
'229
